Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the words of Albuccassis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Therefore, as Albuccassis has completed this book for you, the last of the science of medicine, it is fitting that he conveys it to you through this treatise, which is divided into surgical procedures.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Since the art of surgery has been altogether abandoned in our region and in our times, due to great danger that threatens the science itself and its tools are lost; there remains only a few brief descriptions of it in the books of the ancients, which are altered by many errors and obscured until their true meanings and the power of the art become obscure.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	It appears that I will revive this treatise in accordance with its original structure of exposition and clarification and abbreviation; and for the forms of cauterizing instruments and other tools necessary for the work, the explanation and preparation are essential.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	One of the reasons why there are few skilled artificers with their tools in this time is that the art of medicine is long, and that its practitioner must be familiar with anatomy, which includes knowledge of the joints and their forms, as well as their connection and disconnection; knowing the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their excrescence; and the pulsating veins and quiet veins, and the locations for their issuance.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And according to Hippocrates, who has a name that is much in word, but small in deed, and even more so in the art of surgery.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said about that [Hippocrates] in the beginning of this book; for whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, is not worthy to be considered a doctor, as I myself have seen many who are ill-informed about this science and practice medicine outside their field and through experimentation, which often leads to the death of patients.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I have seen a foolish and inexperienced doctor perform an abscess called "escrophilos" on the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries of the neck causing a large amount of blood to flow into it, which led to the death of the woman among those present.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I have seen another doctor who pretended to pull out a stone from a man's bladder, which was already infected, and the stone was large, and he cut part of the bladder in order to extract it, but the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I called for it to be extracted, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, it was evident that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I have seen another doctor who received a salary from a duke of our land to perform surgery, and then operated on a black slave who had fractured his hip; and with his ignorance, the doctor cut the fracture open in the wound using pulvins and large staples, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he wrapped it according to his wishes, and rebandaged it, and kept it dry for several days and commanded us not to unwrap it; and thus it became an abscess, and led to its destruction.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to unwrap the bandages, but he obtained peace and subsided with his pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But corruption was already confirmed in the member, so that it could not be stopped, and the corruption spread throughout the limb until the patient perished.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I have seen another doctor who pierced an abscess cancerous, and it was ulcerated after several days, to the aggravation of the malice of it by its master.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the cancerous tumor is pure of melancholic humor, therefore it does not necessarily have to affect everything, but rather only an organ or part of the body which is susceptible to its hostility.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, my son, it is necessary for you to be careful with the operation in two ways: one is associated with health, and the other is with danger in greater circumstances.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	I myself have already experienced this in many places where there is surgery that involves error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to be careful and to avoid this, so that the foolish do not speak falsely about you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons with caution and the protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	Use the best method for the grace of God to gain salvation and praiseworthy success, and leave the terrible illnesses with difficult cure, and lay down your weapons from what causes you fear, so that examination in your faith and in your name does not deceive you: for more remains to your glory, and thus it remains in the world and in posterity to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gualia herself has already said in some of her admonitions:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat bad diseases, so that bad doctors are not called good."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Here begins the division of the book, and it starts with the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is organized in the head concerning feet, in the shapes of instruments and the ironwork of cauteries, and what is necessary for surgery.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on fistulas and perforations, abscesses and wounds, extraction of foreign bodies and similar things related to them, all catalogued and organized according to the shapes of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and the cure of twisting and similar things related to them; the chapter is organized in the head concerning feet, and the shapes of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cautery with fire and acute medicine and reminder of surgery.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise on everything in the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary for me to say the quality of the instruments used in that cautery and their side effects, and in which circumstances cautery should be prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I will say that the discourse on the quality of the instrument of cautery and its side effects is a long and detailed one, subtle in science, and concealed; and many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree with each other, and it concerns only a small part of their discourse, fearing prolixity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I will say that cautery is generally useful in all cases universally, except for two circumstances, which are circumstances without a material basis.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the case of a dry and hard matter accumulation in the tail, some say that cautery is helpful for this, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for the illness which is due to its quality and dryness, since nature of fire is both quality and dryness, it is inappropriate for dry and hard illnesses to be treated with what is hot and dry water.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	It is said that the opposite is true for dry and hard matter accumulation in the tail, that cautery is helpful in all dry and hard illnesses of the human body, since when you compare the human body and its humidity to the heat of fire, you find that the human body is colder.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And it can be said by the argument of the above, that I have experienced this several times myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not enough that one comes upon this who has already been exposed and exercised in the chapter of cautery through previous experience, and come to know the diversity of human complexion and the disposition of illnesses in their causes, effects, and the time of those illnesses.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other complexions, there is no need to be afraid, and especially in cold and moist illnesses, since all doctors agree on this, and do not disagree on the usefulness of cautery in those illnesses.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, my sons, that the secret of healing with cautery by fire and its goodness is that cautery is a burning medicine, since fire is simple and its action does not affect any other member but only the one being cauterized, and it causes minimal damage to adjacent areas.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of burning medicine affects the members that are adjacent to it and makes difficult healing and recovery in sick members.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this; rather it overflows. It is already known through experiment and a long period of study in the art about the truth of causes; therefore I am excused for the length of the speech. And if it were not that it is not permitted in my free will to reveal the secret of fire hidden within it, and the quality of its operation on bodies and the expulsion of illness through philosophical demonstration, which would sharpen your pains.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, my sons, that they disagree on the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and pause the best time during springtime.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, since the damage caused by time is submerged in the benefit of the cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is due to pain or necessary for pain relief, such as fistulas, which cannot tolerate delay because the danger from the illness exceeds the minor harm caused by the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And do not doubt this, my sons, or it is only believed by the common people and foolish doctors, since the healing of that illness which is cured by cauterization does not occur at all times, and there are consequences for it.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think, because cauterization is only in a place where medicine acts to change the complexion and dry out the humidity which causes pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But cauterization is excessive over medicine due to its value, virtue of its operation and greatness of its master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the illness may return at some point in time depending on the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness, its properties, what is prepared in the body due to the aggregation of excess humors in it, and what is ingested by the patient due to causes similar to those. However, if the illness for which cauterization is administered is a subtle one with few superfluidities and humidity, such as cautery of teeth for pain, it is possible that the pain will not return, but only minor damage may occur.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is a common saying that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, and this is an incorrect statement, not according to what I understand in it, since I believe that it is not curing with medicine or any other cause that leads to cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the reason is the opposite; and my opinion that cauterization is the last resort of medicine is not because we administer the methods of healing in some illnesses, but when those treatments are not effective, we then administer cauterization at the end of the cause, and it helps with that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And therefore, from here on I say that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the opinion which the common people and ignorant doctors understand.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cauterization with gold was better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and the loftiness of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cautery does not heal quickly, for it is not absolutely true, because I have already proved and observed that it does not do so in all bodies, and cauterizing with fire is better than with iron as they say; however, when you cauterize with fire from gold, it is not revealed to you, because it depends on the quantity of gold used for the size of the wound, and it prepares to receive cold; and if you adjust it over the fire, gold melts due to heat, and in the fire, some layers may come off which the artisan must be careful of.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And because it is cauterized with iron, we should do it gently and then more precisely in the correct procedure.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to the chapters, and have ordered those from the head down to the feet, so that it becomes easier for you to ask what you want from him.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cauterizing head pain due to cold and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization counteracts cold and moisture in the underlying cause of which there are two, causing scrofula and many rheumatic flues, called corissa, from the head to the heels and earfluxes, and many sleep disorders, and tooth pain and gout, and generally all illness that comes due to coldness, such as paralysis, sclerosis and apoplexy, and similar diseases in these illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cauterization is as follows: First, you command the patient to be evacuated with a medicinal enema for three or four nights, according to the severity of the illness, the age of the patient and his habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Then you command him to shave his head with a razor, and then seat him between your hands on a raised bench and place your hands on his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Then you place the edge of your palm close to the patient's nose between his eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the place you indicated is not reached, mark that place with a probe, and then ignite the olive oil cautery, which has this shape:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Then you press it down on the marked place, in such a way that it descends, and your hand should be held tight, little by little, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then you lift your hand slightly and observe the place, and if you see any amount of bone being exposed, such as the size of an error grain, then you lift your hand, and if it does not retreat from that iron, another one of that kind, if it is cold, into view until the bone I mentioned to you is seen.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Then take a little salt and dissolve it on the place and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then press on the burnt spot in the border and leave it until the scar from the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And you heal the place with a strong four-part remedy until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that when the wound remains open, it gets better more quickly, because it is better and more helpful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them said that the coccyx should be cauterized to the bone, and the cautery must be kept there until a portion of the bone is burnt off.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And it should be shaved down so that it fits the bone, and then healed.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that the cautery should reach the bone, until strong pressure is exerted on it until the bone breaks, and this is the form of alphecati:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They believe that the vapors from the head will expire from that location.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	Keep the wound open for a long time, and apply healing until it is solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not see these two types of cauterization in every case, but only in some men out of fear; and leave that one, you should, for my better health, when possible; because the head is uncovered by the solution of continuity in this way as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a fragile nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first type of cauterization is safer and better for me; and from that herb and with that work for my health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter second.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the cauterization of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the entire head of a patient, and they use gears and rakes and combs and bandages and poultices and cords and gauzes and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery that does not improve any of those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature; and if it is not fragile and the damage is not great, cauterize it again with another cautery after a short time.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize it on the patient's forehead with cauterization until the scab is separated.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the scab and expose the bone quantity that we have cauterized with one cautery in the back of the head in the place called "hole" - and this is the place where pus collects.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And loosen your hand in this, and do not expose the bone, for the patient suffers great pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And say that this cauterization is in its place, for the cauterization at the top of the head and occiput is more subtle than the one used for the middle of the head; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Chapter third.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On non-ancient migraine cauterization.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain occurs in the back of the head or is extended to the neck, use medications that are specific for the head, and administer the other cure, which I have said in the provisions for diseases; if this does not improve, then cauterization in this case is done in two ways: either cauterization with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Cauterization with burning medicine is what you should take a mortar made of alum and grind it, and sharpen the edges of both ends of the mortar.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And apply incision in the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lance until it makes a hole below the scab, until it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And apply pressure on the area stopped by constriction, and leave it for three hours; and loosen the alum, and leave the wound for two or three days, and place a cushion over the immersed area until the area becomes sore.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And heal that one with mouthwash until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some burning medications which I have written in the second treatise of burning medications.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Cauterization with iron in this way: fire for the cauterization, and this is its form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a nail clamp, because the head of it resembles the shape of a nail with some curvature, and in its middle part there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Place your hand over the place of pain, and hold it - to prevent the archery from being touched - and rotate the small iron slowly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of what is touched by the tip of the scab is large enough, lift your hand to prevent the artery from being touched which is nearby, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And immerse the area in salt water and place it on that spot, and leave it for three days; and cover the area with a bandage, and heal it with mouthwash until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you wish, perform cauterization with the tip of the scalpel as in cauterization, and be careful to avoid cutting an artery during this non-ancient migraine cauterization.
Capitol quart.	Chapter fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On ancient migraine cauterization.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraine with what I have said about the previous cure, and what I have said in the provisions for diseases, and the cure does not improve, and sometimes because the disease that cannot be treated with what I have said of the first cauterization with medicine or with fire cauterization, then you must heat the scalpel cauterization until it is white hot, indicating over the place of pain with a long line of which the thickness is the same as the finger, or whatever; and after waiting for a while, lift your hand and incise the artery and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	It is necessary for you to ensure the continuation of the mandible, which is moved during chewing, that the jaw does not be dislocated and the nerves associated with it do not be harmed, and that there is no spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	If it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from an artery that is being excised, for in the excision there is fear, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not skilled; leave the operation to begin with them.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find a reminder of the regulation of blood flow in the event of an accident from an artery according to its method, in its place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this illness that does not require this cautery and the body of the patient is tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the head as we have mentioned before, and heal the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you find (it), administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on constriction of an artery with cautionary having two knives, and this cauterization is better and more advisable.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cauterization of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to inflammation and it is treated with medicinal causes and other treatments as mentioned in the division, but the pain does not subside, then apply fire cauterization, which is called "point", of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And bring the point close to the fire, and it should be moved around the entire ear as a wheel is rolled, or in the circle of each example if the pain is in one place.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Hold the cautery of the ear lancet little by little as you find the spot with certainty.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cauterization of many points is made all over the ear, and what it is, take care of the spots until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cauterization of burns.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Burns that are cured and treated with cauterization are nothing more than the species of substances that come from the sting as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the substance that comes by drying or spasm of a nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that type of burn with herbs and purges and emetics, do not rely on your treatment, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: the first one is the lancet of the ear, the second a small one in its temple, and the third is the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	Pause your cautery for the opposite side of the sick part, as softening does not occur except in the healthy part.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The form of cauterization is to cauterize it with the cautery on the side of the ear extension above a small amount on top of the head, and in the temple another one whose length should be according to the length of the finger, and then remove your hand from the cautery until the quantity of the wound is burned by the thickness of the substance of the skin.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cauterization, and it is the type of knife-shaped cautery, the shape of which is like a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But it is more delicate than that one you find, and it is necessary to have a knife with less excess thickness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the place until the process is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have mentioned and do not rely on your treatment and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauterizations: first of all over the entire head; second, in the middle of the head as we have said; third, in the neck; and fourth, in the coccyx.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of cauterization is done as we have previously mentioned.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	It has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more important; and take care of it with what you process.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the cauterization of forgetfulness caused by a sting.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give the patient in the beginning herbs and pills that are useful for softening.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And shave the head of the patient completely and place it on the neck with the plaster described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Leave it for a few days, as this is the method of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Do what you have previously ordered.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if it cures well in this way, then do nothing more; but if not, make three cauterizations on the back of the head, which should be decreasing from the top of the head to the back of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Leave a gap between each cauterization according to the length of the finger, and take care of the cautery with what is being processed.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you find that the patient is tolerant, then do the cauterization in the middle; and if you find more addiction, then cauterize it over both ears.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Approach the interior that needs to be healed; apply the olive-oil-based cauterization according to the given form.
Capitol .ix.	Here is the translation for the next sentence:
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Here is the translation for the next sentence:
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	You must proceed with the cleansing of the head and use what I have told you; then shave the patient's head, carefully cauterize it in the appropriate place on the head, cauterize all the corners of the head, cauterize the back part, and apply three cauterizations on the neck vertebrae.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If it is necessary in the treatment of mollification of the body that has many tumors and the patient cannot tolerate it, and the disease is strong, then cauterize it with four cauterizations on the spine of the back, and afterward, cauterize within where the pain originates, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Approach the interior that needs to be healed, and this should be olive-oil based cauterization.
Capitol .x.	Here is the translation for the next sentence:
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Here is the translation for the next sentence:
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Do not cauterize the epileptic; rather, that epilepsy is caused by a blow.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, clean the brain of the patient at the beginning with vinegar and the other treatment that I have described in the division when the patient is large and can tolerate the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the patient is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, administer powders and pastes to help clean them; do this for several days with good food preparation.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the patient's head, and carefully cauterize it in the appropriate place on the head according to the previous method, and another cauterization on the back of their head, and cauterize each corner of the head as well.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the patient is strong and can tolerate it, cauterize them with the cauteries that I have mentioned, providing both paralysis and body mollification on the neck and back vertebrae.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	Use olive-oil based cauteries as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, pause with subtle cauterization according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Here is the translation for the next sentence:
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Here is the translation for the next sentence:
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are rotten and corrupted humors or heavy blows, then cauterize it with the cauteries that I have mentioned in the case of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	If the cause of melancholy is excessive decline leading to melancholy and the patient's body is humid, you should give them something that cleans their brain as described in the previous division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the patient's head, apply a small round turban made of linen over the circle, and pause it in the appropriate place on the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The patient should be placed face down, and held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then pause liniment; it is more appropriate to use an ancient remedy of sheep's wool.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	Heats that on fire is placed for controlled heating, which he tolerates when it is put on him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then places it in the correct position of his head in the circle, and let it in until it becomes cooled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Do this to the patient every week once, along with his good regimen until he is well; or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points according to what seems best, but have a cautery prepared in such a way: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain with equilibrium.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then cover that open area with leather or wool blankets.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On cauterization due to water flowing down the groin.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have identified the start of water flowing down the groin by the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient a drink that clears his head, and keep him away from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	Have him sit in a bath of warm water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then tell him to shave his head, and cauterize it at the middle of the head with a cautery; and cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of diuresis in both groins, or with one cautery if it is the start of water flow in one groin.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut all the veins and arteries that are covered by the belt, and let the cauteries be in that space at the level of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Keep yourself away from blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	I will come with wisdom regarding the extraction of arteries and the abscission of those and caution for blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Sometimes, it is cauterized in the cerevisiae behind two bones with two cauteries properly positioned.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears in the groins are old and persistently due to veins and arteries manifestly located at the head's apparent location and it is verified that this is excessive fluidity, then cauterize it with a cautery as mentioned in the chapter on water flowing down the groins, at the middle of the head and two cauteries in the cerevisiae behind both temples, and two cauteries in the cerevisiae behind two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if addition is needed, then cauterize it along the entire length of the buttock of the groin at the tip of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On cauterization of nose smell.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you are treating the patient as mentioned in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare yourself and give the patient chamomile tea for three nights; shave his head and cauterize it with a mild cautery using an olive oil-based cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize it with carnation cautery and two cauteries on both eyebrows just above the hairline.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Keep yourself away from the arteries that are not to be cut.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	The form of the carnation cautery is as follows:
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On moisturizing cauterization of eyelids of groins.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the groin is moistened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with one cautery and this lunar-shaped cautery. Here is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you (the physician), cauterize it on both eyebrows with a small cautery at several points and extend the incision along the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Make each cautery according to the size of the eyebrow ridge.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press too hard with your hand while using the cautery, but only according to the thickness of the eyelid division that is being treated.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On cauterizing the eyelid of the groin when the hair turns into the divisions and points the heel.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the heel is divided into parts as if it is pricked, cauterization can be done in two ways: cauterization can be to burn or can be a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cauterization is with fire, tell the patient to read the skin where it is to be burned, until it becomes long and narrow; if you prick that, then you must burn its edges so that it does not become bad until the skin has grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Once the skin is grown back and has healed, place a cloth on the head of the patient and apply pressure to the eyelids of the heels with a handkerchief in the shape of a holly leaf and at the beginning of the handkerchief near the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then place a cotton cloth soaked in oil or chicken glue on the heel.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And apply heat to the cauterization tool.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then cauterize the figure marked by the sign, bit by bit, in small spots, until the surface of the skin, which is like a holly leaf, is completely burned.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of the healing of the operation is that you see the eyelid of the heel contracted and the skin over the prick rise up.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Therefore, raise your hand and hold it for three days, and place a cloth over the wound until the scar is raised.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And cure that with lard until it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the skin returns for some reason and the eyelid becomes soft, then do another cauterization over it just as before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the skin is in the eyelid and does not raise to its normal place and heal, then cauterize it until it rises to its place and heals so that it does not prick the heel.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But if the cauterization is with burning medicine, tell the patient to read the skin until it becomes long and narrow, and place a paper of linen in the shape of a holly leaf on it.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Take known powder and living coal and sprinkle them together. I mean, Or if you do not have those substances, mix them as well and make it with haste so that it is not spoiled; spread that on the paper in the shape of a holly leaf and place it on one heel or both; place a cloth soaked in oil over the wound, and let the head of the patient be in your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And hold the medicine on the wound and press it lightly without damaging it until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, because a "bite" is similar to fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when you feel the burn, remove the medicine from the wound and leave it for a while; then when the burn stops, remove the medicine and wash the heel with water; consider if the eyelid has risen as it should be washed with fire or incision, because in this case it is healed; and if it does not return to its place from the medicine over the area where the medicine was not pressed and did not spoil, your operation is completed and the wound is healed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And place a cloth over the wound until the scar of the incision is raised, and cure it with lard or something else until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to keep an eye on your operation so that no pus comes out from the wound and if the eyelid becomes soft within a few days and some cause of the skin pricks in the heel, then repeat your medicine over the area where the eyelid became soft, just as you did at the beginning, and apply it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the shape of a holly leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you should know that men's heels are different in size and shape, so according to that is your treatment done.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And this should not be concealed from the one who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On cauterization of fistula that is in the heel's lacrimal gland.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat fistula as previously said in the section on diseases and do not confer your treatment, then you must cauterize it in this way: tell the patient to place his head in your lap, and have a servant hold the head of the patient in such a way that it is not harmed or disturbed.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And place a cotton cloth soaked in oil or chicken glue on the heel of that person.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And apply heat to the cauterization tool in this shape:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	The shape of the tool should be concave, like a reed or feather quill, with the end where the cauterization is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you wish, it should penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, it should come out like a plow.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	The concave one (object or person) is better for the procedure.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Approach the fistula if it's open, and draw out the pus and dry it up from there.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it's not open, then open it and remove the abscess from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Place your hand over the cautery that should be well ignited, and hold it with your other hand about one inch away from the nose, so that neither you nor the patient are disturbed, then place the cautery on the hairs of the wound and burn it up.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	If the cautery penetrates into the bone at first, that is good; if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; leave it like that for three days, and place your hand over the area with a bandage and surround it with a dry compress until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if it lasts more than ten days and is not healed, place sharp, corrosive medicine on it until the bone is exposed and scraped as needed in its particular case.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Another method for cauterizing a fistula which some of the ancients used to say: put the hand at the location of the fistula and fumigate it, then place a thin thread (cautery) in that fissure; and it should be the amount of one ounce of lead melted; hold your hand with good grip, but do not harm the patient because the melted lead must not reach the wound of the patient; you should also put the wound of the patient on albumen of eggs or water, for lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed by what has been said about cauterization and healing, that is good; but if not, it is necessary to administer a trauch (procedure?) of the nose and reduce the fistula to the chest of the nose according to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of the fissure (or crack) in the buttocks.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times a fissure occurs in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, if the treatment for those fissures does not work as we said in the previous sections, then burn it with a small cautery knife according to this form:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	The concavity should be shaped like that of the blade (cautery knife).
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Place it carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the edge of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Cure it with wax until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess develops in the uvula or palate or tooth root and it breaks, becomes antiquated, and turns into a fistula, if you cannot heal it by treatment, then it is necessary to ignite the cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula, and place that ignited cautery in the fistula opening, holding your hand until the heated iron reaches the edge of it. Repeat this procedure once or twice; cure it with what we have said about healing until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the pus is drained and healed, that is good; but if not, it is necessary to expose the location and remove the rotten bone according to its case.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cauterization of teeth and softening of ulcers.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the ulcers are softened by moisture and the teeth are bad, if you treat them with medications without success, then place the patient's head in your lap, approach the cautery with the desired shape (most likely a small knife), place the quill on the tooth, quickly insert the cautery into the cavity of the tooth, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Approach your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery as desired.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	The patient should place their mouth on salt water for an hour, then rinse it out, because the rotten tooth is closed and the soft gum is strengthened, and the corruption of moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cauterization of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to heat or inflammation, or there is worms present and the cure does not work with medicine, then cauterization is performed in two ways: either cauterizing with a cow's branding iron or cauterizing with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterizing with a cow's branding iron involves taking the iron and heating it in a pot or fire, then carefully wrapping the tip of the heated iron in cloth and applying it to the tooth as quickly as possible until it becomes hot.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Then repeat this process several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the heated iron and apply it to the painful tooth, then place the hot iron on top of the wool until the iron reaches the bottom of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, cautionery with fire requires the use of a candle or iron, and it should be ensured that there is not too much large material and the heat of the flame does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And carefully apply the hot iron to the tooth, holding your hand over it until the cauterization is complete; do this several times as necessary for the pain to subside or on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	It is necessary to press the heated iron against the tooth with a good brand, and the patient should keep it in their mouth for an hour before spitting it out; this is the method of cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	Cauterize as much of the affected area as you are able to reach.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the shape of the cannula (thin tube used for medical procedures):
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are caused by cold and wet humors and do not respond to digestive medicines, if you wish to aid in their digestion gently, then heat the cauterizer in the shape described as follows: have two openings on either end so that the smoke escapes through one while you apply the cauterization through the other, and place the heated iron on the abscess once, and if necessary, repeat this until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, then apply the cauterization according to its size, and let it heal by itself for three days, and apply a cloth soaked in brandy on top of the cauterized area until it has burned away the infected material.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And treat that with saliva, bandages, and linen until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the cannula or cauterizer should be as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of tonsillitis and constriction of windpipes.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes upon the throat area of the lung, particularly when it is accompanied by heat and congestion, it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at first with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the affected area of the larynx in the depressed location.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	Be careful not to burn the larynx with the cauterizer or char the windpipe's cartilage too much. Only apply a small amount of heat.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	Cauterize that area with another cauterizer on the joint of the neck at the lower end of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cauterizer should be shaped like a nail following the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And treat that with what was previously described until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of lung disease and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughing and lung disease are due to cold, wet humors, the patient does not have a fever or throat irritation, and the condition is old, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the furcula at the depressed locations on both sides, and use another cauterizer in the middle of the foot between the nipples; and let the cauterizers be shaped like nails following the previously described method.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, perform the cauterization with a punctate cauterizer, which was described in the treatment of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make incisions into those [affected areas]; then care for that area with whatever remedy is suitable before it heals.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And prepare the cautery with three prongs, because cauterization is often done that way: at one time you can perform three cauterizations in this manner.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cauterization for tickles, which is the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper (i.e., a bone or body part) is dislocated due to excessive lubrication and not corrected during its return, you must reduce the dislocation as soon as possible according to custom, and have the patient lie on their stomach or back; then elevate the shoulder blade that is on the affected side, above the dislocated area with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated in the lower region.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then prepare the cautery with two prongs; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Then cauterize the shoulder blade, making an incision through it into the other side; and you will find the figure of the cauterization at four points.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let this be subtle according to the amount of tension; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	At some times, it should be adjusted according to this count, and because there are eight cauterizations.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then pause over the cautery with salt, and place the patient in a calm state, and let the affected member not be injured for any length of time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is above and toward the chest, and this has been done, then cauterize over the muscle with a sharp cautery or multiple puncture cauterization, because the joint will be strengthened and excessive moisture will be removed, and the patient will heal.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	This appears to be the title (or opening line) of the next section, which suggests that this text is discussing cauterization of the stomach. Without more context, it's difficult to say for certain what this treatment involves or why it is being performed. It could refer to a specific medical condition affecting the stomach, or it might be a general discussion about using cauterization as a means of treating various stomach-related issues. Without further information, it is impossible to determine the exact meaning and purpose of this text.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When moisture and clots appear in the stomach before it bursts from its confinement and multiplies dangerously, and if you continue with the treatment methods without conferring, then the patient must lie on their back, extend their arms and legs, and have the area cauterized with three cauterizations: one cautery placed over the feet for the size of a finger, another sharp cautery, and two cauterizations placed over the sides of the cautery to form a triangular figure. Extend the distance between those that are not adjacent in order to create a pockmark.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is two-thirds of the thickness of the shoulder blade.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be in this form without addition. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery at the appropriate location of the stomach in this manner; and this should be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	The stomach should be cauterized punctually at the point where it is afraid of the cautery: and you must be careful to puncture the stomach with as many points as desired, and then cauterize those points with the cautery; and care for that area with the treatment that precedes until it heals.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	This appears to be the title (or opening line) of a new section, which suggests that this text is discussing cauterization of the inguinal hernia (fietge fret). Without more context, it's difficult to say for certain what this treatment involves or why it is being performed. It could refer to a specific medical condition affecting the inguinal region, or it might be a general discussion about using cauterization as a means of treating various hernia-related issues. Without further information, it is impossible to determine the exact meaning and purpose of this text.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When inflammation in the abdomen occurs due to heat, moisture, or excessive wind before its normal course is disrupted by extravasation, and the patient is treated with what has been said and nothing more, it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back, and then three cauteries should be applied according to this form and this quantity on the abdomen below the hypochondriac region, which will bring about the supine position of a man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	The space between each cautery should be according to the thickness of it, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Do not press down on the cautery too much.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of liquid applied matches the size of the bladder stone and it is not adjusted, if the patient is standing on their feet; if not, they should be seated, who has already opened their legs, and raises their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And you are able to perform these cauterizations with a surgical cautery, when you have subtlety and caution in your craft.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Be careful not to overdo it in the cauterization, and ensure that the bladder stone is completely cauterized so that the entire body and intestines are reached, as the bladder here is delicate; know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On abscess incision of the abdomen using a surgical cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an abscess or boil occurs in the abdomen and you want to determine whether it is located in the abdominal muscle or the abdominal wall, if it is within the abdominal muscle, the patient feels heavy and increased pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If it is in the abdominal wall, the pain intensifies greatly and often exhausts the doctors when treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should lie on their back; then locate the abscess area and heat up the surgical cautery, which resembles a thin piece of cloth, as described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	Cauterize the abscess and the surrounding area with the heated surgical cautery until the entire bladder stone is burned away, reaching the opening, until pus drains out.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Take care of the remaining abscesses with appropriate treatments until they heal.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary to use this cauterization technique solely, but rather the one that has been studied in the art of medicine and extended to treat more diseases; however, some experiments may be useful for this operation, but you should still follow the established guidelines, as they are generally best.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On cauterization for pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Ancient cauteries for the treatment of abscesses in gynecology were used to treat pleurisy in this manner; take one of the dry and long cauterization tools from gynecology and find a long, thick one.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Submerge the chosen tool in oil and heat it up, then cauterize the area between the clavicle and neck using a cautery, while also applying two small cauterizations on either side of the lower jaw, one slightly descending behind the beard, and two more on the affected rib cage, with a slight descent towards the back; apply another cauterization on the foot, another on the stomach, and three on the back; and another cauterization between the shoulder blades, as well as two more on either side of the feet, along with the one that was applied between the shoulder blades.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it's not necessary to compress your hand with the cautery, but rather keep it open during the procedure.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	As some ancient men used cautery made of iron resembling a ray and ignited it at that spot between the ribs until we reach the abscess and it is drained, as I said in the hernia abscess.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	However, in this perforation with the cautery, there is no fear, because death can occur quickly at the site of the fistula where healing does not occur.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating the spleen disease as mentioned in the treatment by division and you do not confer with your colleague, then cauterize it in one of three ways, all of which are appropriate, of which one is to make three or four rows according to the length of the spleen as shown in the figure of the cauteries in the hernia, the figure of which has been preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	The size between each cautery should be the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the method of cauterizing should be as described in the cautery for hernia.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	Do not compress your hand with the cautery; and the patient should be laid on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Another method of cauterization is to ignite the cautery with two handles, which we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the abdomen that is on the left side of the spleen so that the patient can lie on their right side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	Your lifting should be such that you lift the abdomen according to the length of the body so that the cauteries can be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And bring the two handles together, ignite quickly, in the area where they penetrate the abdomen of the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Pull out the cautery and thus there are four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you want to, cauterize with a cautery having three handles.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And bring the cautery that has been left to cool for several days, because it is more convenient than other previous causes in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of hydrocele.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Do not cauterize in hydrocele but rather in a cyst.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating hydrocele with the methods of treatment mentioned in the division and you do not confer with your colleague, it is necessary that you cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one on the stomach, one on the groin, one on the spleen, two between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right leg, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be appropriate for the thickness of the abdomen.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Leave the cautery open so that it cools for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	Do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the cautery with what is necessary to prevent them from having two intentions, and hurry with their recovery using assistance.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be as shown above, and it is that one with which the back is cauterized according to its previous shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of the feet and hips.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	If the feet are abscessed and filled with sticky water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot near the ankle and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting it; and raise your hand, but do not completely return it because the sticky water runs out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is as follows: Place two cauteries on each hip and in each hip make a cautery with the tip of the cautery cutter.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	The cautery should be the length of the hip: the first one below and the other a little lower on the hip; and two cauteries on each hip.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound open without treatment for a long time because some water drains from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then care for the affliction of those causes which I have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	(The title or heading)
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Here comes the next sentence to translate:
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdominal wound is affected by decay and moisture that softens the tissues, it is the digestive and retentive virtue that is affected, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated with the methods of treatment but does not confer improvement, and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization displaying the virtue, then cauterize it with a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been described in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and four cauteries around the umbilicus, with subtle cautery clavils; and with cauterization on the alcatin over large wounds, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the excess moisture is intolerable for the patient, then cauterize it on the penis and on the intestines, and apply two cauteries firmly to the stomach near the inguinal areas, as this is a complete cure without error in the joint treatment. This seems to suggest that if the excess moisture cannot be tolerated by the patient, then cauterization can be done on the penis and intestines, and two cauteries can be applied firmly to the stomach near the inguinal areas as a complete cure for this condition.
Capitol .xxxiv.	(The title or heading)
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Here comes the next sentence to translate:
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	And when the old hemorrhoids arise naturally or are caused by cold humors that decay or corrupted moisture, and they have been treated according to what has been said in the division but do not confer improvement, then cauterize it with three cauteries on the base of the two small and triangular buttocks, and with a cautery over the navel twice.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is affected and their food is spoiled, and sometimes the face becomes gangrenous, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery as described before; and one cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen with a subtle cautery clavilh, and leave the cautery open for some time until healed, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	(The title or heading)
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Here comes the next sentence to translate:
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	And when you cut an abscess, then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the heated cautery into the abscess that has been cut out, and immediately apply pressure until the cautery reaches the vein from which blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if there are several abscesses, then cauterize each one as described before, and care for them with medication until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize using a large cautery on a wound, it is more effective in treatment.
Capitol .xxxvi.	(The title or heading)
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Here comes the next sentence to translate:
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	And when nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is afraid of it, then heal with cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when there is a fistula in nature that has become old and infected with decaying matter and moisture, and it is unfit to proceed with the treatment described earlier, then approach the problem carefully using a subtle method, and be aware of the depth of the fistula as described previously.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Approach the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then apply the heated cautery to this fistula, and according to the extent to which it penetrates it.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Repeat the application of the cautery until the corrupt flesh is burned quickly one time or two or three times, according to your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Be careful not to burn nerves or veins; or if the fistula is in the belly of the bladder or the belly of the intestine, then beware of those places; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then take care to heal the affected area.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the location is sealed and separated from it the material, and remains thus for a long time, then you know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the material is not removed from there, then you know that it is penetrating or in the bone, corrupting it, or that it will come out of those causes which will be remembered at its location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capítulo XXXVII.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Sobre cauterización de la gota.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the gout joints pain occurs due to cold or swelling, and therefore the patient's pain is increased, then it is necessary to cauterize that area on each gout joint using a pointed cautery after remembering the appropriate cautery for each joint.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And hold the cauterizing instrument firm with a slight pressure, so that three lines of cauterization will be made, and therefore they will be more effective in relief.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capítulo XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Sobre cauterización de la vejiga.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When in the bladder there is debility and softening due to cold and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then you should cauterize it at a location lower than the bladder, on the side of the bladder, starting from the pubic bone, and cauterize with a pointed cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	Y la longitud de cada cauterización sea igual a la profundidad del hueso; y cauterízalo con un cauterio en la parte más baja de los dos, o con dos cauterios si es necesario.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	Y debe ser un cauterio puntiagudo tal como se indicó anteriormente.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capítulo XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Sobre cauterización de la vejiga masculina.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When in the male bladder there is cold and moisture, and therefore abstinence is prohibited, and menstruation is contaminated and delayed, and pain occurs during their discharge, then it is necessary that the location should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a pointed cautery on the location lower than the belly, or with two cauterizations, and it should be a pointed cautery.
Capitol .xl.	Capítulo XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Sobre cauterización de la deslizamiento de la cadera.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	Cuando la humedad se infiltra en la zona de la cadera y es la causa de su desplazamiento, y el síntoma del mismo es que la parte afectada es más larga que la otra cuando se compara con ella.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	Y el lugar del desplazamiento se encuentra en lo que está rotado.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Por lo tanto, debes cauterizar al paciente en la zona de la cadera con un cauterio circular, ya que tendrás señalamiento alrededor de la zona como es necesario para que la zona cayese en el medio del círculo.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the cautery mentioned before be used in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if that cautery is not at hand, then proceed to cauterize it with three cauteries and a large olive-oil cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Let the cautery be made according to the size of the wound in its entirety; and care for it within that area until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter forty-first.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle area and it is caused by cold and dampness, the patient is treated with what has been said earlier and not contradicted, which is an ancient remedy. Therefore, it is necessary that you release the patient from thick humors using foul-smelling pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cauterizing with burning medicine or cauterizing with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	If you choose the first method, cauterize it on the ankle area with three triangular cauteries in this manner, and make sure to achieve good depth with them.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	Let the space between each cautery be in proportion to the thickness of the tissue, and if the olive-oil or large cautery is used.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes, however, let the cauteries be over a different spot on the ankle, so that there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, cauterize with the circle described in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, which should encompass and burn the entire wound.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the method of cauterization in sciatica when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the thigh over the spot where the pain is located; and one cautery over the hip for four days a little less than the width of the palm.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If the cauteries are with a knife, let the depth of the cautery be in proportion to the size of the wound.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the patient is suffering from pain that extends to the location near the feet, then cauterize that area here where it is located with a cautery at three or four points, or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the patient is suffering from pain that is behind the thigh, then cauterize it here with a knife-cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	In every cauterization, be careful not to burn nerves or large arteries with the cautery, and because of this, you will harm the patient or cause contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	I have seen one and another of those who cauterized over the hip and burned in the cauterization, and the leg swelled up to the knee, and the burning caused it to become inflamed and rot away completely.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And pay attention to the fact that a strong solution of the stomach is very dangerous, and be aware that this can lead to death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two locations at once, then cauterize each location according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And it was said by the wise men in the cauterization of ankles that this is the method for using a cautery: make it look like the circle of an iron with its circumference being the size of one palm; and let the depth be proportionate to the thickness of a date-stone or a small nut.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle should be another third, and the space between them should be the size of a knuckle. The circles should be opened in two places, and the length of these gaps should be one or two knuckles. The margins of the iron should be properly fitted into the circles, and this is the shape:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Let it be ignited in the fire until it becomes red-hot and emits sparks, and then let it be placed over the ankle area while the patient grabs onto a cold stone.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	Therefore, cauterize that area with three circles on one occasion.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Let that area rest for three days, let it be plastered with linens and leave the wound uncovered for several days; and let it be treated with warm poultices until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	It was said by Albucasis: my sons, of this type of cautery we have used very little due to fear of the consequences and because few people have observed it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	However, among the many cauteries used, some help alleviate the pain at that location.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	However, cauteries with medicines adhering to them are those that you should make two circles having a small hole in one of them where the goaff of iron is inserted; and the length of the wall in the thickness of their shoulders should be two knuckles or more if necessary.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And the space between each of them should be in proportion to the thickness of the tissue; they should be open on both sides and contain the medicine between them in this way:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Let the patient sit on a cold stone and press your hand over the ankle area, and then take some boiled water between two circles, and let its quality be like a small fire gradually increasing, and hold it for about an hour, and make the patient endure the pain and the pressure of the cautery - because this cautery is like fire - until the pain subsides.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Approach and lift your hand towards the instrument, and clean out the cold water from the entire anus with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Let him rest for three days and apply pressure to that boil until the blackness of the discharge remains, let it be washed for several days, and redness will appear around it; this is the remedy in aid.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Approach the wound with honey until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain is extended to the thigh or hip, make it stand in a position where water can be applied like in an enema.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the method of cold water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and the juice of an extinct bee sting from both parts, mix them together and strain through a new cloth with one side perforated by a small hole, according to the amount needed in a royal dose.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Let the other side of the cloth remain empty, and pour that alkali and living juice of warm water over it, which will cover them with one finger, and when you compress them with your hand for good compression, let the hole that results from the sharp water in the perforated side of the cloth become filled with the other side.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Approach and adjust all that water, pour it over another warm juice and more renewed alkali, because at that time it will be of great strength, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in the cauterization of other members, because this operation is like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some medicines are cauterized wide, for example, pitch and honey mixed with sulfur.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Galen recommends a procedure and cure for the pain of anus and sciatica in men from ancient times, which is excellent, and he says that no other treatment is necessary for it, and he indicates that it heals in one day like this, as he recommends, because the remedy in bathing and washing with it is powerful.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	It should be taken with a certain greenish herb, and if it is not found, fig leaves should be taken; and it should be ground with a little salt and applied to the anus where the pain is, or to the thigh, or to the hip, and left.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	It should be left for the amount of three hours or the amount that the patient can endure the discharge.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Approach it with bathing and when the body is warmed up, immerse it in the sun, because the pain ceases and heals.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	You should know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cauterization with these medicines unless there is the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Escorides says that when a vein is stretched with a goat's incision, it is better to cauterize it; and the cautery should be made in this manner: wool should be taken and soaked in ancient oil, and placed between the toes and the heel.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Approach the dried goat's incision and inflate it with fire until charcoal is formed, then place it on wool and let it be spread out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Approach [it], and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the ankle and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cauterization is called "cauterization of veal."
Capitol .xlii.	This appears to be the chapter number (42). Here's the next sentence to translate:
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	This appears to be the title of a section or chapter. It translates to "On cauterization for double pain." The next sentence is:
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain is in the two [feet] due to various causes, such as overexertion or injury or excessive evacuation, and also because of similar causes, by infusion of cold and wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	Cauterization should not be done in any other case except for this specific one, which is caused by effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, evacuate the patient with pills filled and similar to them, which should be made on the foot where the pain is three fingers deep according to its latitude, but take care to avoid each line when cauterizing or more, depending on the quantity that comes from the patient's tolerance and the potency of the substance.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	The cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries or with the middle claw-shaped cautery in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	This appears to be the chapter number (43). Here's the next sentence to translate:
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	This appears to be the title of a section or chapter. It translates to "On cauterization at the beginning of swelling." The next sentence is:
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This disease often affects small children; and the sign of its onset in children is that it attacks their structure, affecting elevation and mobility.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	It occurs at the lower end of the spine and the toes that begin to rise above the others. This could be interpreted as swelling or growth in those areas.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, when you see this and wish to prevent it, you should cauterize it with a circular cautery in the following manner:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Take the cautery over the entire circumference of the spondylus (spine). This would mean that the circular cauterization should be made around the entire affected area.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you wish, cauterize in the circumference of the spine with a pointed cautery of two or three lines. This means that the number of lines for the cauterization would be either two or three, depending on the desired outcome.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	The points should be close together. This suggests that the cauterizations should be made closely together to cover a larger area and prevent the spread of the disease.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Take care to heal the area with what has been said before (previously mentioned). This suggests that proper care should be taken to ensure that the affected area heals properly, based on previous instructions or advice given.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that the cauterization is not administered in swelling caused by nerve spasm. This suggests a caution against using the procedure in cases where the swelling or growth is due to a nerve issue, as cauterization could potentially exacerbate the problem.
Capitol .xliv.	This appears to be the chapter number (44). Here's the next sentence to translate:
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	This appears to be the title of a section or chapter. It translates to "On cauterization for gout and joint pain." The next sentence is:
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	This is a repetition of the first sentence of the text. It translates to: When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	Therefore, since gout caused by coldness is cured with a method of treatment and the pain is not prolonged, you should use cauterization as a last resort. This suggests that other treatments for gout should be tried first, and cauterization should be used only if necessary or when all else fails.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is known that you cauterize it near the joint of the foot with many cauterizations in a circular manner. This suggests that multiple cauterizations should be made around the affected joint to treat the gout or joint pain.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The olive-shaped cautery is as follows:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. This sentence is a repetition of line 3 in the text.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pain spreads to the nails or other joints, and this often happens, you should cauterize it on each nail with three or four cauterizations all around using the olive-shaped cautery. This sentence is a repetition of lines 14 and 15 in the text.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If more cauterizations are necessary (depending on the situation), you should cauterize it and not press too hard with your hand beforehand, only immerse the tip of the cautery in the substance (medication). This suggests that multiple cauterizations may be required for effective treatment, but excessive pressure or contact with the skin should be avoided.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain penetrates into the anus and two fingers, then administer the cautery as mentioned in the previous chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is only in the lower part (of the body), it is called sciatica, and then pierce around the pelvic area as described, and pierce along those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If the pain remains in the aforementioned (part), then pierce around the pelvic area over each night and at the wrist of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If the pain approaches certain days towards the joints or the muscles, then cauterize all of them in every part of the tendons.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	Do not evacuate the patient with good care and reception of medicine, for if it is done with good care and this cauterization is used, it will be healed, God help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the cauterization of ruptures (wounds).
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When an injury occurs in the groin and intestines are brought forward to the genital area, it begins to close, then it is necessary that you order the patient to abstain from food on his day and use softening substances for the wound to heal.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient with your hands on his back, and order him to keep his clothes inside until it is time for them to be removed or the intestine or hernia appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And return him with your hands to the mentioned place and press on the fracture along the bones of the femur, showing the extremity of which is similar to the size of a circle at the separated parts of the chest.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And heat the cautery of which form this (is):
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Until it is quite dry (and) seared.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And place the cautery on that spot with your hand holding the cautery straight, and hold it there until you reach the bones of the femur to the middle of the thigh; and repeat this process if you did not reach the bone in the first examination.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Be careful to observe the direction of the hernia during your cauterization, that you do not burn the hernia, for it may cause death or other serious problems in the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Know that when you do not reach the bones with the cautery, do not perform the operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be delicate according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Take care of the cauterized area for three days with bandaging until the scar of the fire is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Take care of it with other medicines until it is cured.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should remain lying on his back for forty days until the area and the wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	It is necessary to abstain from food according to the duration of the patient's healing time, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of recovery.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when you want to move him after forty days, administer it gently and take care of him for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	Let him rest, abstain from work and food and drink, and avoid loud voices, for when he follows this healing regime he will be cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will speak about the treatment of other parts of the abdomen and the beginning of it, and if you do not want them to stop (the healing process), then cauterize the rupture with the cautery in a circular manner according to its size, as the third part is expelled from the body in this way; and take care of it as described earlier, without making any adjustments.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And we will tell you first that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, as described in the previous section:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and the line that passes through the length across the wound and above it, and another line along the upper part; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cauterization should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Treatise on Cauterization of Twisting (or Knotting)
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in a limb due to injury or striking, and the pain persists for a long time without relieving with medication, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	Let the cautery be of all members according to their size and smallness, and their virtue and development, and the location of twisting and pain in them.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the first cauterization heals, that is good; if not, repeat the cauterization on the same limb; for it is customary with such pains that they are punctures in a member adjacent to the one affected, so it is necessary to achieve those with caution before the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter forty-seven.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Treatise on Cauterization of Leprosy
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some cases of leprosy are treated with a cautery for great benefit, but it is less effective for the type of leprosy caused by decay of flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Therefore, when you want to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is common and can be treated as mentioned in the classification, and does not spread, and be careful that corruption does not encompass the entire body of the patient and all their complexion, then cauterize it on the head with two cauteries: one in a central location on the head, and the second slightly lower down, bring the forehead to the end of the hair; and both over two corns; and one behind, on the nape or the neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Lastly, place your hand on the cautery a little before it touches the bone and makes a slight indentation, and thus the scabs will be displaced, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated from there; and cauterize on the sole as previously prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread on the patient and is apparent, then it is necessary to cauterize it with the cauteries as previously mentioned in the head; and a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries over the eyebrows, and two cauteries over the spinal processes of the neck, and six cauteries over the spinal processes of the back, and a large one near the coccyx, and one at the coccyx, and two over the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the heels, and one on each heel, and two on the wrists, and two on the forearms, and two on the hands; and cauterize it over all the joints of the fingers and toes, and over each talon of the feet, and over the phalanges of the fingers.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are over the talus (ankle bone).
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some cases are cauterized with a single cautery over the bones of the pelvis and another on the stomach opening, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that when you apply more cauterizations, it is more beneficial and more healing; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as with scabs, because their body is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauterizations be large or small depending on the members and joints, according to the characteristics of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the cautery with flour of eggs beaten with honey and the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter forty-eight.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Treatise on Cauterization of Stupor (Stunned State or Shock)
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member becomes stunned or asleep and is treated with medications, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then you cauterize the stunned member according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	Let the cautery enter the depth of the wound slightly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care of it with mouthwash until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	In some cases, a stunned state enters the fingers and feet, and the spine of the back and the eyesight of the nerves that affect that member, and the stunned state is relieved.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not rely on this but only on one who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves moving throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter forty-nine.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Treatise on Cauterization of Gallstones that are Formed.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When gallstones are old and do not respond to any of the medications for them, then you cauterize it with a preheated cautery slightly according to the depth of the wound until the whiteness and color of it is relieved and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Approach the treatment of that man with a mixture of barley flour and lentils soaked in red oil and arnica leaves, and the blood of a pigeon or hare, divided and mixed together, and limit a cloth on the area until it heals.
Capitol .l.	Chapter one.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Chapter on cauterization of crabs (scabies).
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize the area with a circular cautery as it is turned.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The wise men say it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle; but I do not think so because I fear that it may ulcerate, and I have seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is more appropriate to cauterize it in the circumference of the area with a circular cautery or with the flat cautery.
Capitol .li.	Chapter one, part two.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Chapter on cauterization of abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an abscess is delayed in maturation, it may be due to superfluidity or the condition of the patient who is old and decrepit, has little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around it with a flat cautery with small punctures; and apply a leech over that area which will help in the maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to perform perforation with cautery, then you should heat the cautery and its shape should be as follows: and immerse it in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the cautery is in a location that is further down because the arm needs to be relieved; then treat it until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter one, part three.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of cauterization with corrosive (substance)
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	The corrosion that rots a member is like dry wood consuming itself with fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	If you see the corrosive in a place that requires cauterization with fire, then heat up the cautery iron a few small and large degrees according to what is appropriate in the location where the corrosion is present.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then cauterize it entirely from every side until you have completely removed all the corrosion and there remains no cause for it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Leave it alone for three days and rest on the cauterized areas so that they are scabbed over with oil mixed in until all the scabs have been removed and all the corruption has been eradicated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then care for it with meat broths (or soups).
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	However, if after three days the meat grows healthy without corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization on the areas that have been corrupted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosion can sometimes be treated with acute medicine, because it is inappropriate to use cauterization in such cases.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, fire cauterization is somewhat helpful for pus drainage.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the treatment of it with acute medicine in the division, so take that when you have need for it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cauterization for abscesses and similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Often observed at the joints of the feet, a swelling called an abscess that is large and penetrating, which lies against the foot; and cauterization in such cases can be done in two ways, either with fire cauterization or water-boiling cauterization.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Fire cauterization is that you heat the cautery iron shaped like a pen-knife, which should be made of iron in proportion to the size of the abscess on all sides, and with thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then press the heated iron against the abscess, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the abscess until the cautery reaches the depth of the abscess.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Leave it alone for three days until pus begins to flow out.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply an ointment made with wild mallow leaves ground with salt, and let the ointment remain on it for a night, because that will eradicate its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then take care of the place with meat broths until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not heal itself, and often such things happen on the surface of the body, especially in the more sensitive areas like the feet, then you must administer water cauterization there, which consists of using a copper or iron cup or pen-knife, pressing it against the abscess; and get hot water into the cup little by little, and keep your hand, and rotate the cup with compression of your hand all around, and apply pressure to the edge of the cup on the side of the abscess, causing the hot water to flow out through the opening of the abscess; and wait for the patient an hour or so for the pain caused by the hot water to subside, and then remove it, because the abscess with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And you should do this to all such things in the body until they are completely healed.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then take care of those abscesses whose roots have been eradicated with meat broths.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cauterization for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When a tremor occurs due to pressure on a nerve or fever caused by pressure, or for some other similar reason, then you must cauterize it with four cauterizations or more along the spinal column, between each vertebra with one cauterization; and cauterize it in the feet, and over the stomach, with olive oil cauterization.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And that tremor subsides and hastens the healing of the diseased condition.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cauterization for sudden swellings of the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there is a sudden swelling in the body, and it becomes pustules that are made of grossly corrupted materials; therefore at the beginning when it appears, you should immediately cauterize over the entire length of the fistula with a thin cautery made from myrtle wood, the end of which is extended with fire; or with the lance of erostology (long thin needle); or with leech therapy.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is cauterized at the beginning of its eruption in this way; and it is not credulous, and the excess is removed by these means, and it heals from those things.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it must be done with appropriate evacuation using leech therapy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cauterization for bleeding of wounds by archery incision.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Troops often encounter bleeding from an arrow wound that is incised with a sword blow or incision of cauterized flesh, and in such cases it is difficult to stop the bleeding.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when it happens to someone's archery, you should press with your hand on the opening of the wound and press firmly until the bleeding stops, ensuring that no more blood flows out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then press in the fire the olive oil cauteries few and large, by number, and blow on them until they are hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Then take one of them, either large or small, according to the place and wound where the artery is broken, and quickly place it over the vein; you will have stopped the bleeding by then, and insert the cautery until the blood stops flowing.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	If the blood is expelled from the wound in the artery when you stop the bleeding and withdraw the cautery, then take another cautery from among those that have been prepared in the fire, and continue pressing on it until the bleeding has stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and do not let some other harm come upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	Know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in such cases, especially if the artery is large, except by one of four methods: either using cautery as described above, or extraction when it has not been extracted, since extracting the ends will burn them and stop the bleeding; or applying ligation with a ligature or strong suture, or pressing on it with pulverized medicines that have the property of stopping blood flow, and tying them decently.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But one who administers a proper ligature and a strong suture with threads or by burning causes and similar ones does not confine himself to these alone.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if it is necessary to do so without a doctor or medicine being present, then press firmly on the indicated vein as described above, and understand the great effort required until the blood has stopped flowing from the main part of the wound, and do not allow blood to flow over the artery; and sprinkle cold water over the artery until the blood has solidified and thickened; and in the case where there is a need for cautery or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision, perforation, and punctures, and of lacerations and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words by Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	I have said in the first chapter about all diseases where cautery with fire is appropriate and medicine is required, as well as their circumstances and causes, and the instruments necessary for them, along with the forms of cauteries; and I have arranged the chapters from the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And in this chapter, I will proceed in that manner so that the desired relief is obtained for the one who asks for it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, let us remember that in this chapter it is for the fear of those who are in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because we must be very careful, since in the operation that is described in this chapter there are many evacuations that involve blood, which is life-sustaining; therefore, the aspersing of the vein or incision on the abscess or opening of an ulcer or purification of a wound or extraction of a splinter or incision of a stone and their similarities require great caution.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the most extreme cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I admonish you to be cautious in this matter, since some cases may require you to act in a manner different from how men usually act in the presence of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And there are some who flee from their illness and it is easy for them to die, especially due to the severity of their illness, its duration, and because the illness is a sign of death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among these are those who have given you their property and money, hoping for your health; their illness is harmful to you.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore, you must not consent to the one who comes to you in this manner; your caution should be greater than greed and rapacity; and do not presume any cause without certain knowledge that validates it, and only do what brings praiseworthy results.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Use in the treatment of all your patients the prediction and indication for the one to whom health is converted, since it helps you acquire fame, memory, praise, and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, may God inspire your understanding and not give you guidance or protection, since this is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter divided into sections according to what was described in the chapter on cautery, from the care of the head to the feet, so that you are relieved of whatever it is that you ask for and need.
Capitol primier.	Chapter One.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the care of water contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease, which is common in infants, should be caused by the infant's crying and when the newborn does not cry strongly enough to empty the head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some cases occur due to a hidden cause that is unknown.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	This pain is not seen in adults, but only in children; and all whom I have seen suffer from it, it appears to me that death soon follows, so it seems to me an unfortunate work for them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	You have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head was so swollen that it could not stop growing due to the size of his head, and moreover, the moisture increased until death by cold occurred.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture either accumulates between the scalp and the bone or under the bones on the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	The operation on that person should be performed if the moisture is between the scalp and the bone and the abscess is small. In this case, it is necessary to make an incision in the middle of the head along a width of two fingers, and the length of the incision should be long enough for the moisture to run out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is under the bones, then you see that the joints of the head are opened on all sides and the water is pressed out when you compress it with your hand on the edges and not covered up by you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary to make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And extract all the moisture; and strengthen the incisions with lint and feathers; and bind it up with oil for five days, and remove the bandage and heal the wound with compresses and poultices, and strengthen the head with a splint; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And another method of incision, consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, because sometimes it is larger in the occipital region, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore pay attention to the location where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and make the incision according to what is most convenient for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And beware that you do not cut the artery and make blood flow and kill the patient by bleeding caused by draining the moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On incision of the arteries which are called auricles, referred to as lymphatic vessels.
Capitol segon.	Chapter III.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When cataracts or ulcers occur on the eyelids or feet, and this is an old practice and does not benefit from medical treatment, then the cure in such cases is by making an incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to incise those arteries in the patient's head, first examine the location using a rough cloth to reveal the arteries, and keep the neck of the patient strong with a cloth; and consider where the vein pulses; and press on each side of where the auricles are located, and they can be covered up except in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And apply the probe to the artery and incise each one with a sharp spatula that pierces through the bone, and this is for the length of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the spatula under the artery and break it at the incision points above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two fingers' width apart, since when a vein is incised, blood flows out with pulsating excretion, which jumps due to frequent jumping.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear in the joint, then it is necessary that you measure three fingers' space from the auricle, and probe with the probe, and proceed to the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And the quantity of blood to be let out is one ounce. And do not let out more or less blood than the quantity that appears from the nature of the illness and the filling of the artery from it.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Approach the wound, and since there remains any cause on the bone that produces purulent discharge, then incise it to prevent a purulent abscess from forming.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Approach the wound with linen and cotton, and treat it with ointment inside until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	This appears to be a new section or chapter title, written in Latin capital letters. It's common for medieval medical texts to divide their content into sections, so I will continue translating the text line by line:
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	This sentence seems to be discussing the extraction of an artery that is located in the temples. I'll continue translating line by line:
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old emigrant or someone with similar symptoms appears due to acidic humidity and qualities in the temples, or a sudden violent illness that resembles these, and it is treated with the methods of curing medicine and it does not improve, we have resorted to the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient shaves the hairs in the temples; and understand the artery visible in the temple by the pulse it has shown, and it is hidden unless in a few people due to the intensity of cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If it is hidden, then tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; and approach the area with a rough cloth or heat the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And you take the lancet, which has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And approach the neck with the lancet and make an incision in the area where the artery appears; then cut the artery at the upper parts until you extract it from the tendon, and remove the membranes that cover it from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, you wrap it with the onion tip, and make an incision from that part according to the length of the ends and their contraction; do not allow for blood flow, since if they are not incised, all the blood will not flow out.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And evacuate the old blood with vinegar. For three days.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with strong thread of wax or cord, and do not allow for decay before the wound heals and promote blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And cut the excess between two linen strips; do this in that hour or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you want to, cauterize it with a cautery until the bone is reached with a cautery knife before cutting the ends, and leave that work in place.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better work if the patient has fever or a hot complication, since cauterization helps with drying humors; therefore it is more effective in combination.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary to approach the extraction of arteries with clean hands and let them rest for a while before dressing them gently with powder, and cure them with dry medications that promote the growth of flesh and warm them until they heal.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If during another examination blood flow from the artery occurs, then you must stop the bleeding, either with a cautery or by applying clean hands to the area, and press firmly until the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If any cause of that [issue] is not present for you, then place your finger on the affected area until the bleeding stops, and pour water of intense heat into it until the swelling subsides, and press firmly as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	What is easier for the extraction of an arrow is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have marked both the locations and separated them, one from the other, without interruption, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities can be elongated, because it is not completely consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	Let the swelling of the two blades serve as an example.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if the swelling of more than two blades is better, because if it is sharp like two blades near each other, it does not cut the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, in cases where there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is applied to it and the flesh is removed gently.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better in every way and easier as well.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Let the space between two blades be the measure of the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of chests with acute and chronic pain in the lungs.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the pain in the lungs is chronic, and the veins on the chest that are above the head are affected by this, and no cause of the cure can be found for it with medicine, and at times the face of the patient turns yellow as if from a form of poisoning, and their eyes become sunken and appear swollen, and their breathing becomes labored as if they were walking through sand, and their lungs are weakened, humidified to such an extent that their skin is known, and their lips are scabbed due to the acidity of the tears. The ancients used mastic for treatment of this condition using this method, and I name this cure as spasmodic.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to raise their eyebrows that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions on the forehead at equal distances according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be at an equal distance to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids that are near the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Keep away from the incision of the arteries, which are in two directions, and stretch your hand from the continuation of both the jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	Then adjust the space of each incision to three fingers' width.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge with a cloth attached or dry towels that squeeze out blood, use it to drain the pus.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then insert two sharp pointed instruments into the incision, of which this is the shape of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	from the separation of the temples until the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise the entire cord that is between two incisions and cut through the ciphus which is on the bone, and place it from the incision of the thigh to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then straighten the sponge and insert it into the first incision again with another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side but not on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the sides of that sharp instrument, attach the skin to the cord, and cut through the bone, inserting it into the gap between the incisions, and detach everything that descends from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Make sure the incision continues to reveal the cord, and place it in the gap between the two incisions.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when a sufficient amount of blood has drained out, compress the swollen places of the blood clot.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And pause in each gap until the pus dries up a little, and pause over those powders that have been moistened with vinegar and oil and vinegar essence, and observe whether it does not cause an abscess to appear.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day, remove the linen and administer a large infusion of boiled water or tea, and care for it with basil oil and other substances until the sores are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On treating abscesses through catharsis and the heels that descend from the separations inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When an acute and persistent catharsis occurs and the patient's abscesses are extended slightly, and their weakness is evident, with ulcerated eyelids and their eyes sunken, and there is sharp pain at the base of the skull along with swelling, it is clear from these symptoms that the materials and catharsis do not come from other veins but rather from separations inside the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best treatment for these cases is as follows: order the patient to recline their head, then make a single incision in the center of the forehead, small in width (starting from the left temple and ending at the right temple; and it should be through the bone; extend your hand beyond the temples which should not be touched by the bite), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Drain all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth and fill the gap between the lips of the incision with gauze or cloth soaked in oil.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And press on it with powders moistened in vinegar and oil to prevent an abscess from forming.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	Once you remove the dressing and see that the abscess has decreased, it is necessary to scrape the bone starting from where the flesh begins, and treat it with an astringent regimen which will cause the flesh to dry up, as if you were taking flour from wheat and colophony in equal parts and mixing them, and making a plaster and administering it to these sores near the natural flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On treating what catharses in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The cause of catharsis in the ears can be one of four types: it is either a mineral or similar stone like iron and glass, or it is from plants such as cheese or beans, or it is a fluid substance like water and vinegar, or an animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when the catarrh occurs in the ear or another similar cause that does not fit within the ear, and the ear is closed, if it seems painful, then distill some oil of violated or sulfur into that cause, and apply the extraction of it, make the patient sneeze with suitable conditions, and hold the nostrils to prevent sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then cover the circumference of the ear with some cloth or wool, and stretch the ear at its openings, as it is often overlooked with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not treated, then apply the extraction of it with the instrument called epicioric subtil, whose form is as follows:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is overlooked with a cautery, that is good; and if not, then apply the extraction of it with a thin tool of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not overlooked by that, then make a cannula of metal and introduce the end of the cannula into the ear canal and close around the cannula with wax and soft oil so that it is not open except for the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then remove the air and strong suction, as too much of this has been noticed.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not overlooked in this manner, then take alum or beeswax prepared with an appropriate quantity, and place it on the tip of the cannula, and cover the area properly around it.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then introduce that into the ear canal with ease, and carefully extract the ear of moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not overlooked with all the causes that have been mentioned, then you must be careful when cutting what emerges as an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of cutting that is to first lance the patient from the saphenous vein and extract blood according to its virtue, and then place your thumb on the ear and turn it outwards while making a small opening in the edge of the ear, allowing the pus to flow out into the area most pressed.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	The opening should be in the shape of the moon to allow for the pus to come out, and once the abscess is opened, remove it if possible with appropriate instruments; and sew the opening at that time with speed, and care for it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause in the ear is one of the fatty substances that have swollen and inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you don't see it specifically, then you take thin sputum according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the abscission of that fat that has become swollen in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it in several cloths, and carefully extract it with scissors or a thin cautery, or open it as described above, for the extraction will be relieved.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that has entered the ear, the patient should use sneezing with suitable conditions at first, fill his ear with some old cloth, and apply it over the ear where the water is, and if this is overlooked, that is good; but if not, take many thin needles and cat's eyes according to the length of the finger, heat these up slightly in the fire, and the patient should introduce one of them into the ear canal and sneeze on the one side of it and hit another needle against the first needle inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not cease (the treatment) until all water has been drained off.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	Then the water will be drained off, as soon as you take paper or cloth. and put one end of it in the brazier (or fire) and extend the other end into the water until it has burnt through the center.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then take another cloth and do this as many times as necessary until all water is drained off, and store the one with the syringe (or tube) as mentioned before for the next use.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the case of animal extraction (or evacuation), if it is small, perform it more gently and similarly, treat it as mentioned in the division; but if it is large and causes a bulge at the abdomen, administer its extraction immediately and with urgency, and in this case it is easier to remove than all other causes that occur in the brazier (or fire).
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the case of worm extraction generated in the brazier (or fire), when you treat it as mentioned in the division and in the treatment of distillation and do not find relief, then you must watch the brazier (or fire).
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if any cause of worms appears here, then remove it immediately or with subtlety, but if no cause is found, then take a thin-and-wide tube (or syringe) of the following form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Insert the thin end of the tube into the brazier (or fire) according to the size that the patient can tolerate; then draw out with strong suction and do this many times until all the worms are drained off.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if the patient does not improve with this treatment, then close the circuit of the tube with wax as mentioned earlier; administer distillation that has been described by the ancients in the treatment of worms, and observe it in the treatment of distillation.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Let your effusion be with which you infuse medical oils into the brazier (or fire) using this instrument of the following form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it from silver or brass, thin, in which there is a small hole, and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And let it be such that it fits into the concave part of the continuous tube here where it is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the reed and wrap it decorously around its end, then pour oil into the concave part of the opening (or syringe), or juice from some herb, or any medicine that you choose in the tube — which is in the brazier (or fire) —, then insert the reed with a decorous grip at the top and press it gently until the oil is expelled into the concave part of the opening and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is infused in the brazier (or fire) should be slightly heated with a small fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause which you are going to distill in the brazier (or fire) is not too hot, for medical oils do not tolerate excessive heat.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of obstruction in the brazier (or fire).
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes infants are born from the bellies of their mothers without perforation, and this obstruction occurs in some men, blockage in the meat of the brazier (or fire) due to a wound or no flesh at that location; and this obstruction sometimes happens at the base of the brazier (or fire) where it does not open up, and sometimes it is outside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And the obstruction that occurs at the base of the brazier (or fire) which does not open up is in the greater dispositions for difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which you manage to open up, it is necessary that you place the brazier (or fire) of the patient on a flat surface and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see obstruction appearing, open it with a thin spatula of this form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it (the spatula) in which the width is small, and one side is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula be two lion's lengths wide so that it does not damage the brazier (or fire).
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the obstruction is due to flesh born in the brazier (or fire) or its meat, then remove it immediately and carefully, making a wide incision until all the flesh has been removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if obstruction is at the base of the brazier (or fire), then take a thin reed lion and slightly heat it with fire, and place it gently in the meat of the brazier (or fire).
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you notice obstruction with something that the patient feels with ease, due to difficulty in breathing, remove the obstruction with ease; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the brazier (or fire).
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And place cloth in the brazier (or fire) according to the size of the hole that you have wrapped in the Egyptian balm; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or take any herb and immerse it in water and pulverize it, then use it as specified earlier; and if you notice that the brazier (or fire) has already been closed, then remove it carefully and replace it with another which you will wrap in a thin layer of wax that has been made with rose oil, until the abscess is cauterized. And take care of it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If bleeding occurs, immerse sponge or cloth in hot water and place it over the artery, and use the other treatment that restricts blood flow, which is called in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Capitulo VIII (Chapter VIII)
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the cure for athazel, which affects the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athazel, which sometimes affects the eyelids of men, is often moist and sometimes dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore you should have these remedies at hand or prepared, and incise the affected area with a spatula of its roots, and then apply the remedy as described below.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If pain and bleeding occur, you should cauterize the affected area with a thin-tipped cautionery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best method of cauterization is to incise and apply the ointment when the roots have returned as long as there remains some cause of the disease; and once cauterized with fire, the roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Capitulo IX (Chapter IX)
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for swelling that affects the eyelids of men.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Sometimes swelling that affects the eyelids of men is caused by an ailment similar in strength and persistence to a large swelling, which is why it is called grandyssa.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	It is a thick accumulation of moisture on the upper and lower eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, you should examine whether the swelling originates in an area outside the eyelid and is spreading everywhere, and if so, it is due to a minor cause.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision along the width of the swelling and remove it from all sides with ease until it drains, and suspend it in a warm place to dry and separate it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you are not prepared for the incision and cannot penetrate the eyelid with an incision, then look for any underlying cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the swelling is large, you should adjust it with sutures and treat it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is small, there will be no harm in leaving the swelling as it will restore itself and become incorporated.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the swelling is receding into the inner parts of the eyelid, you should remove the inner surface of the eyelid, remove the swelling with a cushion and apply pressure to it, but if the incision in the eyelid extends it, look for any underlying cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	After the incision, wash the wound with salt water and treat the area with a dressing until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Capitulo X (Chapter X)
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Treatment for excoriation of the upper eyelid in men.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Excoriation is a condition that arises in the conjunctiva of the upper eyelid, and it often affects children, aggravating their eyes and causing catarrh in them; and they cannot tolerate the brightness of the sun due to tears.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	Therefore, you often see them sitting with their faces all the time and sleeping with their faces; and moisture covers the undersides of their eyebrows, which have already become inflamed, and the imminent danger is in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, pus comes out into them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	One method of treatment is for the patient to place their head on your lap, and you apply heat to them and make a circle according to the size that contains arteries from all sides, and place it over that and press with your fingers all around so that pus comes out into the center of the circle, and make an incision in the middle of the moisture with a spatula along the width, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made during lithotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	However, in severe cases it is necessary to cut the skin entirely until you reach the artery, because in more advanced cases pus will drain through an incision similar to that of a white gravel-like lesion.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, remove it with cloths that you have wrapped around your fingers on the sides and twist it between your right and left hands until it is separated.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to close the incision with a spatula so that the pus does not enter the eye and cause damage.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If your artery does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, but you adjust within the fissure a small opening for the artery to pass through; then extract it as we have said; submerge cloths in warm water and vinegar, place them over the area, and press down on them with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	Also sprinkle salt on it in the concavity of the fissure to remove any remaining moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then take care that it heals properly.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs at the cauterized spot, then take care of it with caustic plasters until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Capital .xi [Capitulo XI] - This signifies that we have reached chapter eleven in this medical treatise. The text may be structured as a collection of chapters or sections, numbered for easy reference.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the methods of examination of the kidney.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of the kidneys are narrowed due to natural skin contraction and aging, this is harmful to the kidney and may lead to methods of illness such as persistent tearing, softening of the eyelids and inflammation under the skin, which is known as "touching" the kidney. Treatment is carried out in four ways: by cauterization with fire; with acute medication as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization; by touching through incision and suturing; or by cannulation as I will explain later.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, you should hold the patient's head with your hand; turn the eyelid of the kidney towards your left hand, and if it turns, that is good; otherwise, insert a needle into the one where there is no tear, just below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate faithfully through the tear, about the margin of the eyelid where the hair grows; pull the thread above the eyelid with the tear, and turn it towards the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then make an incision in the tear opening of the eyelid below the hairline, insert a spatula into the larger lacrimal duct up to the smaller lacrimal duct; extract the thread and place it below the eyelid with small powdered cotton or cloth, and then squeeze the eyelid gently, as if in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, the shape should be according to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, because it varies among men, as some require a large incision in the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then make an incision with the spatula along both lines that you have marked, starting from the larger lacrimal duct to the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural furrows, such as the thickness of the king [a metaphorical term for a large person or object].
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then move the onion to one of the two angles of the coden (a type of bandage or ligature), and remove the entire incised area; then stitch the two lips with silk or fine thread, clean the blood, and allow any excess threads that may become stuck to adhere to two eyebrows for some reasons, if you wish to do so, but otherwise, do not worry about it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Then leave the stitching of the threads for three or four days and take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you want, leave the wound without stitching, and take care of it with drying and compressing, because the eyelid is elevated due to the sealing of the wound and the application of something to it; but suturing is better and therefore ancient physicians prefer it.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in this case, be cautious with the patient, and it is a good operation, but not to fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	Another method of touching is to shape the eyelid like a myrtle leaf and lift it with three spaced-out stitches arranged in this manner:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to make the incisions as described earlier, take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure [the myrtle leaf shape]; then insert another thread close to the larger lacrimal duct, and the third thread near the smaller one; adjust the two threads so that they are evenly spaced, and lift the entire bandage on which this incision has been made as recommended earlier.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then stitch the two lips of the wound and take care of it until it heals.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If an abscess occurs during your incision or procedure, remove the abscess with a lancet and apply a similar dressing and warm water.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	In some cases, the eyelashes may turn towards the wound; in this case, use what has been mentioned earlier about incision; but stitching is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Cannulation of the kidney is as follows:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	Convert the eyelid and divide the figure that is inside as I have described; then use two fine cannulas or thin needles, whose length should be the same as the length of the eyelid, but their width should be smaller than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	You have already cut into the extremities of every partition, where you have threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then apply each with subtlety underneath that which is superfluous of the eyelid of the eye, and compress the veins of every partition with strong compression, and leave it for several days, since it will die due to the constriction and be rejected, and it will eventually fall out or be absorbed into itself before it has a chance to spread.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then break the thread and apply care to the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is sutured, raise the eyelid and do not prick the hairs.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two veins that you will perform according to this procedure:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On plucking hair from the eyelid with a needle when the hair is tough.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are not natural, tough, sharp and painful in the eyelid, the operation is that you take a subtle needle and hold it on the soft part of beechwood or lion, and place it gently so that you adjust its extremities without moving too much.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the needle be equal to the length of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then prepare another fine needle quickly beside it, and use its ends if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then place the patient's head on your lap and position it facing the sun so that your work is clear, since this operation is subtle and small.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And insert the needle into the root of the hair with skill, adjusting it so that it enters the eyelid quickly and exits above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And pull out the hair above and insert it into the incision, let there be one or two or three hairs at most.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And pull your hand with the hair out, leaving the incision in the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the incision is drawn out and the hair is not pulled out, pull the incision to the sides with the needle that you have prepared and it, until the incision heals over the wound.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And look at it with the eye, since then you will pull out the incision and the needle, and let each drop of blood come out and leave the clot for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows on good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is short, then you adjust a longer natural hair and lift it up with it, or let it grow until it reaches a suitable space, and you lift that one up.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter .xiii.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of ecthyma that appears on the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When ecthyma appears in the eyelid, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on either the right or left side due to poor wound healing or dryness or cauterization, and it is called leprosy, and this ecthyma can be natural or accidental, caused by poor wound healing or dryness or cauterization, or similar to its causes.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation is that you cut open the consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place a piece of linen cloth in it, and bind them together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not necessary to use any cure for the causes that dry it out, constrain it; since if you do so, the ecthyma will return worse than before and never heal.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in it the causes that soften such as fenugreek, and wrap it with water in which salt has been added, or douching solution, which is made liquid with oil, and immerse the cloth in it and heal it with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The secret of your treatment is that you perform everything skillfully without allowing it to consolidate according to the initial form.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have described is not any correction of ecthyma that does not return the form of the place according to what was done before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter .xiv.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of ecthyma that appears on the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ecthyma that appears on the eyelid below, which is truly called ecthyma; it can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental is caused by a wound, cut, cauterization, or other similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and make an incision in the flesh, and let it pass from the tear duct on the left to the tear duct on the right, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And stretch the skin to the sides above with the needle and sew it with the needle, and cut it open widely with a spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, that is good; but if not, take the ray and place it on the broken figure, and with that turn the eyelid, and make two incisions along the lower edge of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the extremities of the two fissures of two angles of the incision, which you made before they meet, be made an angle until when they converge it is made a figure of theirs.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this Greek letter is Lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then raise the skin to the extent that it is equal to the thickness of the blade at its sharp edge, as much as an eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the separated parts and sew them with woolen thread, and care for them with what has been said of the softening medicines and oils until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if it is necessary to excise by incision or suturing or cauterizing, then you must make a plain incision on the skin of the eyelid as previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate with oil between two lips as previously stated.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In conclusion, in the sum of the sermon on the care of excision whether above or below, run the operation according to the form of excision, and that form is diverse in shape like a dot.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skillful artist always prepares an instrument for every possible method which is available to him until he restores the figure to its natural form or close to it, and the patient according to what suits them in terms of the operation and tools in the greatest arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many men who have the eyelid stuck above to the aqueous humor and prohibited from moving and performing its natural functions, then you must cut off the edge of the eye below the eyelid, raise it up or stretch it with oil.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you should incise the adhesion with a fine spatula, which is not sharp like an incision, having an obtuse point to prevent the patient from being disturbed by the operation, and leave the spatula not touching the aqueous humor with its point.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be such that it separates the adhesion with ease until the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	You should put salted water in the aqueous humor, which you rinse with, or steam it in the dissolved zinc solution in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid from the aqueous humor with oil and place wool soaked in ointment of hemp on the aqueous humor, and use the third day for consolidating causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On incision of a nail and on protrusion of skin around the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail is of two types: either it is nervous and similar to hard dry cartilage; or it is non-nervous, similar to white congealed moisture, which when touched, or if pressed, tends to take oil, separates and the oil is not inserted.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And in both types it does not start until the major tear duct begins to decrease gradually and covers vision, inhibiting the light and movement of the aqueous humor.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the method of working in the incision is that the patient rests their head on your chest, opens their eyes and raises the eyelid with your hand, and collects the nail with oil using a needle with minimal duplication and stretches it to the edges above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And take a needle and insert a horse's or cow's or ox's hair, or similar, or strong thread, double the tip of the needle little by little and insert it into the middle of the nail, penetrate with the needle and hold the nail; stretch it to the edges above, and remove the root of the nail along with the hair, which touches the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And in this way, you follow with the hair towards the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And you should incise the remnant of the tear duct at the root of it with a fine spatula or small scissors, and leave the natural skin of the tear duct so that the continuous flow of tears is not interrupted by the incision.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail with only oil or thread, as previously stated, should be excised with the lion's spatula, which has this shape:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	Be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal membrane and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Make the incision in the aqueous humor a little salt or powdered chalk and let it rest for another day; care for it with what is necessary until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle or oil into it, then this type of nail is treated with medicines, and healed in this way as described and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, then open the patient's eye and take a fine spatula shaped like this lion:
am subtilitat.	with finesse.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it is hardened and congealed and stuck in the root, then steam distilled water from your own hour in the patient's eye made of chalk or roasted rice or salted powder, and apply the steam for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Approach the operation on that area until everything from it has been removed, unless the counter-abscess (cauterized area) is in the wound, for then you should lance it. Care for the abscess within until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Approach the operation on that area with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The discharge of the lacrimal tissue, if noticeable due to great harm, should be stopped by anointing (applying ointment or oil); and it should be cut from that one place, without completing the incision so as not to cause tears of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then apply distilled water or vinegar on the lacrimal head and let it heal without any treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of abscesses and that which is born from skin adhered to the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in abscesses of the eyes, skin grows red and covers the pupil, or approaches or presses on the eyelids and forces them apart at the edges and resembles a rose of a balcony railing.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	However, the operation on him is to have the patient hold his head in your lap; and open the eyes of that one and collect all that skin with suitable scissors or tweezers, and take it away with forceps or tweezers; and begin the incision of the skin at the beginning until everything is finished by the scalpel, and be careful not to descend into the eye during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	Your incision should be made either with the scalpel that we have recommended for nail incision, or with small forceps suitable for that purpose according to the shape of it as described in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is complete and all that skin has been removed, fill the wound with salt powder or distill a red powder similar to those of corrosive medicines into it, and wait on the wound covered with hog's fat until the abscess is completely cauterized.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause of abscesses and pus remains and you fear cauterization of the abscess, lance the wound and treat that abscess with something that will reduce it, then approach the operation on it until it is healed, and do the same for the skin that grows adhered in this type of wound.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must ensure that all healing of the wound occurs naturally or accidentally, work with iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can tolerate that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On collecting pus from the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus is red and thick over the wound and it should be forbidden to apply any dressing to its operation, and leave the wound open for several days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning you must consider if the wound in which there is pus is strong and there is no other disease besides pus, then you collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to hold his head in your lap, and suspend those veins with oil or two according to your discretion; and that oil should be of subtle double distillation as follows:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two oils graduated in one vessel according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then those veins should be collected with fine forceps, with gentleness and without squeezing the blood out immediately, until you see that they are removed from the wound and swollen.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Be careful not to damage the wound at its extremities with the spatula; and if your operation is during the daytime, be firm in your operation so that you do not make an incision except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed everything, distill the green or red liquid in the wound to corrode what remains of the pus.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	However, if it is not possible for you to collect everything at that time, then fill the entire area with something that reduces pain, and let it heal for several days until the pain has subsided and there is no fear of abscess cauterization.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then proceed as the matter dictates until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the shape of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On reducing arisatum (nasal polyps) at the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat arisatum with cauterization or sharp medicine as described in the narrative and it is not healed, do not poke it but make an incision on the mature abscess, extracting all the moisture within it and exposing the bone.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And since the bone is exposed and sometimes corrupt or blackened, you grate it with an instrument that has this form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a grater with a sharp head, and should be made of iron and have a round cap similar to the one that is pierced with a drill or file for subtle drilling (as shown below).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place a cushion on the corrupted spot of the bone, and turn it between your fingers, press your little finger gently into it until you know that the corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	Then make some observations, and restore the area with healing treatments. (This assumes "aquo" refers back to the previous sentence, meaning "it", i.e., the corruption being removed.)
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the area is healed and good flesh grows there, and if it is separated from the body for forty days without being renewed or drained and no accident occurs in that place, then you will know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	But if it is not healed, then you should reduce the wound to the shape of a nose and in this way: and this is what you do when uncovering with iron or sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, you take three pieces of this form: (The following seems to be describing the process for setting a broken bone using splints)
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the exterior of the iron be triangular, and its shaft should be narrowed to the tip as much as possible in this way: (This appears to describe shaping the splint.)
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place one of the pieces on the bone, this should be the lacrimal bone; and stretch your hand a little bit of the hue, then turn your hand with the piece to penetrate completely into the bone, and the patient will feel it as air coming out when you release their hand. (This appears to describe setting the broken bone.)
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	And then you should heal the area with drying and healing treatments as you have been instructed. (This assumes that the previous sentences were describing how to set a broken bone, and this sentence is referring back to that procedure.)
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Once the flesh and area are hardened, you should return the material that was poured out of the wounds to the nose, so it is lighter on the patient. (This assumes the previous sentence referred to the healing process.)
Capitol .xx.	Capital twenty: (This appears to be a heading or title, as capital letters were often used in medieval texts for headings and titles.)
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the swelling of the hue. (This seems to be the main topic of this section, based on the heading and previous sentences referring to healing or treating a wound.)
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the swelling of the hue enlarges to its entirety and no damage or reduction occurs, you must loosen the patient, and then make them lie down, and place warm poultices on their neck without scarification and suck it with good suction; and then place liniment on the swelling which is made of castor oil, aloe, cumin, and sarcocholla, and strengthen the plaster on the swelling with a little powder. (This appears to describe a treatment for a swollen hue or lymph node.)
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The method of the powders is that you take cloth from lions' manes, and each cloth should be folded four times; and make powder from these (cloths). (This appears to describe the source of the powder used in a previous sentence.)
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place them one on top of the other according to the amount that the swelling requires. (This appears to describe applying the powder from the previous sentence to the affected area.)
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And strengthen them with tough, tightly bound cloths; and repeat the poultices without scarification and suck them; and remove the poultices and leave the swelling free during the day and night. (This appears to describe a continuation of the treatment for a swollen hue or lymph node.)
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if the ligament becomes soft in the meantime, it should be made tighter. (This appears to provide a guideline or instruction for the treatment process.)
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And remove the ligament during the day and night as we have said. (This appears to refer back to the previous sentence, suggesting that removing the ligament when it becomes soft is part of the treatment process.)
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the swelling has been reduced (healed), that is good; but if not, you should repeat the plaster with the powders and the tightening and poultices until it is healed. (This appears to provide a guideline or instruction for the treatment process.)
Capitol .xxi.	Capital twenty-one: (This appears to be a new heading or title, indicating a change in topic.)
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the swelling of the tunica uveae. (This seems to be the main topic of this section, based on the heading and previous sentences referring to treatment of a swollen area.)
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a rupture in the tunica uveae, and it becomes swollen and protrudes out from the eyelids like a grain of rice, and its shape resembles that of a man, and you wish to incise it, perform the operation as we have recommended, entering the needle into the lower part of the rupture on one side, and placing another needle in the lacrimal area on the other side and making it penetrate; then release the first needle according to its position; and make an incision at the intersection of the two needles and lift up the lower portion of the ruptured tunica with that needle and remove a piece of the tunica around the needle, and strengthen that area. (This appears to describe a procedure for treating a rupture in the tunica uveae, possibly caused by an injury or inflammation.)
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And remove the needle and place it on the wool-infused albumen of egg and let it remain until the thread adheres to the grape (i.e., the ruptured tunica).
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And cure the swelling with whatever strengthens it until the wound is healed. (This appears to provide a guideline or instruction for the treatment process.)
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And collect all the surrounding area with a circle of cloth around the swelling to contain the large eminence, and perforate it with a thin spatula that reaches the surface of the swelling, let the humid albumin run out, and drain the swelling and insert cotton soonest. (This appears to describe a procedure for treating a larger or more severe swelling.)
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Approach strengthening when it has been healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	Treatment of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease called "alconati" is not merely an abscess similar to water descending, but something else.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is that you place the patient on a bed with sheets and make him lie straight, then grasp his head with both hands, pushing inward towards where the abscess appears to be coming out, and make it dry up and not descend, and keep the wound open, and the patient should see the cause as he sees it.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not descend, you know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the abscess is not ready to descend with what has been said, then you make the patient lie between your hands and take a subtle spatula and place it on top of the abdomen around the edge of the navel, close to the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the crown (into the spot), until it is forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once the abscess is forgotten, you distill the water in a bowl into which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fennel and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And it should be cured with the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Treatment of water descending from the abdomen.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the types of water in the division and which one should be perforated with a knife, then you proceed according to its healthiness.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	You should make the patient lie on a board with his belly exposed, and you press gently on it to make the water move towards one side.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And you should place your left hand near the eyelid of the patient's left side, if the water is on the left side; or with your right hand, if it is on the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And you should take a spoon or lancet with your right hand, if it is on the left side; or with your left hand, if it is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And you should position the handle of the spoon near the crown due to the thickness of the skin around the navel on the side of the lesser tear duct, and then you press the spoon with force and rotate your hand around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And you should penetrate the skin around the navel, feeling that the spoon has reached its destination through your touch.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	It is necessary to measure the path of the spoon from its point to the space that is from the pupil to the end of the black line, and this is the navel's crown; for you will see it with the pupil using the clarity of the corneal membrane.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then place a plug in the location where the water is, and apply pressure on it once, then do so again after some time, and if the water descends quickly, you must immediately allow the patient to see what they are standing on, and place your hand over their eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then wait for a while, and if the water has descended, then apply pressure again without letting the water spill out.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	When it is dry and does not descend, you must carefully extract the water with ease, and rub your hand slowly on the eye socket, and apply a little clear salt from gemma to dissolve in the water, and then wash the inner part of the eye with that; and apply an external eyewash with linen soaked in rose oil and albumen of egg and tie it to the eye with some cloth or stopper.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	However, those of our time place a compress over that swollen area with albumen of egg.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you cannot extract the water from the eye due to its hardness (for some people, the eye is very hard), then it is necessary that you take the spatula, which is called alberid and here is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that junction with the spatula, but do not press too hard, and make sure you do not injure the surrounding tissue; and carefully make a small opening to let the water out.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then proceed as described earlier.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	You must complete your procedure, prepare a comfortable bed for the patient in which they sleep on their back in a dark room, and prohibit any movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And keep the patient in a state of nature, and do not turn their head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Let the linen be according to its position for the next three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then remove that person to the same dark room and expose their wound, show them various causes, and return the linen on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not necessary to do this during the time of healing or immediately apply an infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	However, you must avoid doing this because the water can easily spread with great and violent shaking.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	However, if an abscess has formed, you must remove the eyelid within seven days and treat it with a substance that will cause the abscess to burst.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	You wash the face of the patient with water, and apply a poultice on their mouth to help alleviate the pain for several days, in a dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually lower it down (the poultice) and discuss its causes with the patient.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	Know that in any case, the apprentice is not excused from observing for several days, and you must be confident in performing the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	It has been reported to us that some of these (medical practitioners) called the Artax, and one said he made fire in the Ayrach with a perforated vessel for boiling the water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have never seen such a thing in our land, nor has anyone mentioned it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of the species of eye medicine for those who are ignorant of them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	These can be made from copper or iron, and they have extensions with this subtle, triangular tip, as shown in the shape below:
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of a skin ulcer in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose various kinds of skin grow attached to which there is one cause similar to the scorpion's tail or a polyposis (polypoid growth); and this illness is called polyps, as it resembles that polyp represented by the tail of a scorpion.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And this cancerous skin is leprous and dark-colored, and it is not a lion-colored skin.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those skins that are not fraudulent or cancerous, it is necessary to have the patient sit under the sun, open their nostrils, and pick the skin at those places.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then remove it from the outside, and incise what you have captured from that area with a sharp spatula on one side to ensure that all the skin has been removed; if there is any reason for the abscess to remain, you must carefully extract it with one of the subtle tools as soon as possible.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	However, if the skin becomes senescent or an abscess forms, you must wait for it; or if it is a malignant abscess, you must collect it and cauterize it until it has been completely removed, and all the cavities are left open.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then apply a paste containing vinegar or water to the nose near the incision.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is opened and moisture is introduced into the palate, then you know it has been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if moisture does not penetrate as expected, then you know that there is no carnal matter above the joints or bones of the nose which has not undergone an abscission.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you must introduce a thin probe into it if there is any swelling, and press with the nutz (or fingers) as much as necessary to measure the size of the digit or month, and guide the patient and insert one end of the probe into the nose either with the ray or another suitable instrument.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when that is done, let the patient inhale the odorant to reach the nasal passages, and be seated over his nostrils, for many observed children at school do this action, and it is an easy cause for anyone who wants to perform it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then place the two ends of the probe, one end outside the nose and the other inside the nose, and administer a stitch of flesh with the fingers that are in the probe, and do this until you know that the flesh is within the nose of the probe.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the probe and place it in the nose near the extraction of blood, and do this for three days or more until the pus dries up everything that is rotten from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And in conclusion, place a lead pipe in the nose for some days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if the patient's condition worsens and requires more advanced treatment, use that method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is the shape of the instrument for a nose purger maker who distills oils and medicines in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Make it of silver or brass, similar to a small, open lantern or small bowl, as well as its handle.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you wish, make a closed pipe like a cane, and the nozzle of the nose purger maker's instrument should be flat, open; on which you will hold it when you suck out oil or any other liquids or juices and substances that you want.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	This nose purger is precious: a recipe of beaver castoreum, white balloon flower, ginger, wild pimpernel, long pepper, asafetida, epithelium of the onion skin, and cumin. Mix it with juice of wheat and cabbage, and make pills, and dissolve one pill in hot water, and pour it into the nose of the patient lying face upwards.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	From the eyes to the outer edges of the nostrils.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many observed that the eye is located at the outer edges of the nostrils, and it is magnified and emphasized in some days until the gaze has been fully attentive to it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And therefore, you must mark that at the beginning of its appearance, and observe everything about it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place your hand or cautery or burning medicine on the spot where it is located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its appearance is delayed until it has been magnified, then consider whether it is hard, dark in color, and with little sensation; in that case, do not touch it with iron because it is a cancerous ulcer; for many observed that he who marks this cancerous ulcer brings great harm to himself.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the ulcer is touchable and not dark in color, and marking it is possible in all cases, then evacuate the patient and mark it without fear, and cure the spot with oil or any other suitable substance until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On stitching of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity is resolved due to boil or similar conditions.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You should know that when the continuity is resolved in one of these cartilages, you should not perform this operation except in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you mark for any reason one of these cartilages, consider whether it is a fresh boil with pus, and then sew the two lips of the boil together with stitches, and care for it until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of resolution of continuity are already separated and each one is healed, you must cauterize each part of its edge until it comes to the pus.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two labia with stitching and tighten them, then sprinkle dragon's blood powder on top and let it dry, and place a piece of healing ointment like diafinicon or any other consolidating ointments over the powder. Leave this dressing for two to three days, then remove the dressing and replace it with fresh one until the abscesses heal by themselves, and take care of it with warm water until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	Then the method for stitching is that you use continuous suture or with needles as we have recommended in abdominal surgery, or use continuous suture with pins as you know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of causes that occur in both labia during childbirth.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times, in the delivery of men during childbirth, abscesses similar to pimples filled with purulent matter appear on their labia, and some are milder while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you must separate the labia and incise each of those hard areas all around, then fill the abscess with boiled water until the pus is reduced, and wash it with vinegar and treat it with astringent water until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of incision of the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Sometimes pimples arise on the adjusted gum flesh, which the ancients called albulus, therefore you must suspend it with a thread or hold it with forceps and incise it appropriately, and let the pus drain out or let the blood flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then place a dressing of boiled water or other astringent or caustic powders over it.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the flesh returns, incise it again and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for tooth extraction.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in childbirth and those outside and between the gums are misaligned, crooked, and sometimes discolored and made brittle or become hollow inside due to decay, causing rot of the gum and the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore you must keep the patient between your hands and hold his head in place, and extract the teeth where those misalignments and causes similar to sand appear, until there remains no cause for it, and remove the blackness and discoloration and any other impurities until they are cleaned.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If what is at the beginning of the reasoning is correct, it is good; and if not, you must repeat the reasoning on another day or the second or third day until it reaches the desired conclusion.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth require various resorbs of different shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	Therefore, the razors with which you remove a tooth from its socket are other than those used for filing between the teeth according to various shapes. These shapes of razors should be prepared, which you will soon see:
Capitol .xxx.	Title: XXX
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On Extraction of Teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You must cure the tooth of its pain with great care and patience in the entire extraction process, for it is not a trivial cause that bleeding occurs when it is extracted, as there is a refined substance inside that requires an excuse during the extraction process.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Moreover, when the patient is to have that tooth extracted, you must be absolutely certain which tooth is causing the pain, as many times the pain deceives the patient and makes them believe it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one, and the pain does not cease until the sick and painful tooth is extracted, for we have seen this happen often in barber surgeries.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, after you are certain which tooth is causing the pain and know what it looks like, then you must incise around the tooth with a scalpel filled with some substance that has a healing property, until it dissolves the tooth from the gum on all sides. Then bring that to the surface, either using tweezers or fine forceps, gradually until it is completely exposed.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And apply strong, large pliers for good grip or firm structure, and hold the patient's head between your thumb and forefinger so that you have a firm hold without causing discomfort, and then grasp the tooth in such a manner as to extract it properly, neither breaking it nor causing the patient additional pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if this is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it near the tooth with ease and effortless movement to facilitate its removal as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	However, if the tooth is fractured or corroded, you must cover it with a cloth and tighten it at the root tip to prevent it from breaking during your compression on it using pliers.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	You must work carefully with incision around the entire gum and guard your strength to ensure you do not break it or leave a part behind, and return to the patient for the cruelty that is greater than the initial pain of their tooth.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not perform what some ignorant barbers do in their brashness and overconfidence during tooth extraction, as they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great suffering that are difficult to alleviate, and all the roots remain, or some of those roots remain, or you extract it with some bone fragments as many times we have witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And before the extraction, wash the mouth with wine or vinegar mixed with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If bleeding occurs during this process, as it often does, you should apply a certain amount of egg white and pour it over the wound. If the egg white is not effective, then cauterize the area.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and fine pliers used for extracting teeth should have a long arm, a short handle, and be wide to avoid being folded when working with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And so, as often happens when large hands enter, they should not be contracted, but rather short extensions.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And make iron rods from India properly made, and in the ends of these rods should be teeth which enter into each other and contract by strong force, and sometimes the ends of these rods are shaped like the beak of a bird called ciconia, which is called a guanta, and they have strong contraction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capital .21.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the extraction of teeth and removal of broken bones from the jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	If you need to extract a broken tooth, there should be some cause for this, then you must wait over the area covered with a bandage for one or two days until it becomes softened; and then insert tweezers or pliers similar to the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, the shape of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of these (the tweezers or pliers) should be made flat like a file or an alfajar.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not comply with this forceps or tweezers, then you must be careful of the root and carefully cut all the flesh and insert the instrument called an ataly, which is a small lever with the following shape:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	It should have a short, thick handle, not bent so that it is not broken.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the root is forgotten in this process, that's good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are their shapes: The shape of the first instrument is a triangular end with some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a very thin end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you will be helped by this instrument that has two ramps with the following shape:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments that I will describe for the removal of teeth; because it is done with this instrument that resembles a large scissor, and this is its shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular twisted or short end that has some thickness, and not bent so that it is not broken.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another thing you should know is that tools for teeth removal are made similarly to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	However, skillful and subtle craftsmen who are knowledgeable in the art, will learn for themselves according to what this procedure means and the various diseases; because there were diseases for which ancient physicians did not have or use a specific instrument, due to the different shapes of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is fractured, or if it needs to be moved, then a piece of cotton should be applied to that area with what is suitable from the instruments and forceps mentioned during the extraction of tooth roots, and assisted by the hand motion of the person performing this action. This is the method:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	Make it gradually smaller, and hold it in the mouth so that it does not escape or fall out before the bone is healed; then restore the area with suitable medications.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small fracture in the bone, remove that part of the fracture and its blackness, and heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth protrude unnaturally from their normal shape, and especially when they do so in women, and especially in venerable girls, it is necessary to consider: if the tooth is close to another tooth and neither suturing nor linament can be used, remove the root of that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, cut it with this instrument whose shape is as follows: like a pig's snout, made of sharp Indian iron.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	Make the incision with which you will cut it in several days according to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure that it does not damage any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the protruding tooth is worn down by grinding, grind it with an Indian iron file whose shape is as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	The entire file should be made of Indian iron and its edge should be sharp; it should have many small points like a drill bit, with which the tooth can be ground down gently in several days with ease, so that it does not damage any other teeth and fall out.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And align the edge of the file at the end, and remove that part with another razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If part of the tooth is fractured and the tongue licks it, you must file that part until the sharp edge of the fracture is removed and filled so that the tongue does not hurt or corrupt the speech.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On restoring damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are knocked out due to injury or extraction and the patient cannot bear to eat, and you have treated it with stiffening medications, but your treatment has not been effective, then in order to prevent decay in those that are strengthened with gold fillings and not silver (since silver turns green and needs to be replaced after a few days, while gold does not change over time), use this method:
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	The filling should be made with the appropriate thickness and size depending on the amount that can fit between the teeth; the shape of the recess is such that you take the filling and place double the amount between two healthy teeth, and allow it to grow curved between two damaged teeth, or if one or more, until it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Then apply the cement to the damaged area where you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not damaged anymore.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	Your strong grip should be used to hold the roots of the teeth that may fall out.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then cut off any excess filling with forceps or scissors, and insert it into each location using hand movements, and fold and hide the excess between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, to avoid hurting the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And seal that tightly like a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loose or broken, strengthen it with another filling at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the shape of teeth and the configuration of two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, as shown below:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When a tooth or teeth return to their original position following extraction, and they are allowed to grow back as recommended, and remain healthy.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Only experienced and wise people should do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	A piece of cow bone can sometimes be used for a cause of the jaw bones and shaped like a tooth, placed in the place where the tooth is missing, strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On incising the ligament that is found in the tongue and preventing speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that is found behind the tongue sometimes occurs naturally with some people or accidentally due to an illness that has already been consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation is to open the mouth of the patient and expose their cavity; lift their tongue and incise the nervous ligament as wide as possible until the tongue is released from its root.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or obstruction due to consolidation of an illness, then you throw salt and cut through it as widely as possible until the ligament is incised and the obstruction is resolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to cause a wound in the skin of the flesh and that you split this arch, so that blood flow comes out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the remains of the incision with warm water or vinegar, or water and soap; then hold it closed for a time, so that the patient does not stick out their tongue in any way every night to prevent it from healing again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if there is bleeding, place a piece of vitriol on the spot; but if blood comes out, then cauterize the spot with a cautery made from lignin vitae (a tree resin).
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the removal of a lymph node from under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, under the tongue, there appears an ulcer resembling a small pimple that prevents the tongue from performing its natural function and swells the mouth greatly.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is to open the patient's mouth wide in front of the sun, and examine the ulcer.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it is blackish or dark in color and hard, the patient does not feel anything from it, then do not touch the cancerous part.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it turns white with humidity, then you put onion in it, and incise it with a subtle spatula, and cut it all around; if blood comes out during the time of your operation, then you hold zinc (vitriol) over it to stop the bleeding.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have treated it with the above, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the removal of an ulcer between two ears and the one that is nothing in the cauliflower (gland) and other ulcers.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When a gland becomes swollen, they are similar to cauliflowers, which appear outside and are called two ears; when you treat them with what has been said in the division, and it is not healed, then consider whether the ulcer is hard, dark in color, with little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is red in color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron due to blood flow; leave it alone until it matures, and either you pull it out or it breaks on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is white in color, round, and the root of it is thin, then that one must be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The operation on it is to consider whether the ulcer has rested in place with cautery and repose completed or if it has been diminished by any means; then hold the patient facing the sun, the head of the patient should be under your hand, and open their mouth wide, and a servant takes the tongue between their hands with a noble instrument with this shape:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It should be made of silver or iron and be thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Thus, when you press the tongue with it and show the ulcer to you, then you catch it with your instrument, and take onion and place it in the wound, and pull it out as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that pulls the covering of the cauliflower, then incise it with an instrument with this shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and is similar to forceps, but the prongs of it are curved so that the orifice of each one faces the other, sharp and made of iron with a blunt tip.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then incise it with a spatula of this shape: sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And when you have incised one side, incise the other side in the same manner of incision, and then hold the patient's wound with warm water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if bleeding occurs, use the decoction of milk thistle or mastic tree leaves, similar to those for styptic causes until blood flow is stopped, and then treat it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Sometimes, other ulcers appear in the cauliflower besides those two ears, and incise them according to what I have said in the incision of two blisters.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	I have treated a woman with an ulcer that was located in the cauliflower of hers, which was dark in color and had little sensation; she already had her cauliflower closed, and she was breathing with difficulty, and she had already prohibited food and drink for herself and was near death if she had stayed for a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The ulcer had grown so much that it had to be drained through two incisions.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Thus, you should cut the cauliflower fistula and place an onion in one of them, pull it out, and collect the large part, and then incise the other opening, and hold the mouth of the patient, compress their tongue, and place the onion in the ulcer.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	You have already made a large incision in it, and only a little blood flows from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the hernia of that woman is healed, and she should begin to drink water immediately, and food should be prepared for her, so you do not continue to make incisions in that abscess many times over a long time, but an abscess will occur at that location instead, which should be incised before it prolongs.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then you burn the wound with fire and cauterize it, so that it does not become infected; and then you walk around and do not know what God has made of that place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of a hernia when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarr appears in the hernia and it is abscessed and long, it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the thick and round part near the anus, it is called a bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is healed as said above and does not conform to your treatment, you must be cautious, especially since an abscess that has already healed may remain hidden and subtle; then you should incise the rounded one if it is present; and if it is along [the length], and is bloody with a dark or black color, and is not centimeter-sized, you must be cautious about the incision of it because there is fear for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that one like I have said of its whiteness and length, you make the patient fast and press his tongue with the instrument used to examine its shape and put your finger in the new opening and pull it down and incise it with one of two instruments mentioned in the incision of a boil.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you must not incise it except where it is appropriate on the natural boundary without addition because if you incise more than that, you will damage his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And at the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of a boil, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, you must use fire in its cauterization without fear, and the method of cauterizing it is not with anything other than water, and you hold his head in your lap and press his tongue with the instrument as we have said, and take from the sharp water that we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and dip the tip of it in the living part, and stop the bleeding by pressing it with a thick cloth, and fill the depression of the instrument with that water.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the exterior of the depression in which the medicine has been placed be like the concavity of a mortar [or pestle], and let the instrument with the medicine be placed on the ulcer, and let the patient cough over his own side so that saliva or mucus from his mouth comes out through his side because of the internal medicine, so that no such thing happens to the hernia of it and that it heals.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And place your hand with the medicine on it and press it against the ulcer for a space of about an hour until you see it become darkened and numbed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take care and wrap that over the tip of the finger, immerse the dressing in the medicine, and insert the finger into the dressing in a tube until the dressing adheres to the tube, and do as many times as necessary for the cauterization of the grape, and then let it dry and fall off within about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and cauterize with a clean cloth dipped in oil around the grape, and clean with that what is in the circuit of the medicine, and wash it with warm water, and heal it outside with an ointment, and cover it with bandages inside until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This method of healing is safer than incision and longer in fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the ulcer is healed with something that is cauterized and incised, but it is cured with subfumigation in this way: take camphor, hyssop, origanum [wild marjoram], rue, scicadium [a resinous plant used for fumigations], camomile, crushed, and similar to these of the herbs, and adjust all those causes or some of them in a mortar, and immerse it in vinegar and boil; let the mortar be well beaten with a wooden pestle, and there should be a hollow in the mortar on which an instrument is placed according to this method; it should be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And let the end [of the instrument] be inserted into the mouth of the patient up to the place where the steam can reach the ulcer until it is obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat this treatment many times until it is dry, and be careful that you do not perform this healing at the beginning of the abscess, because it will aggravate the abscess, and you must not do that, but rather the declaration of the abscess must be cauterized.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument at hand, take a tube and make a hole in the extremity of it like a mouth, so that the patient's mouth is narrowed because the closure of the oil prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter thirty-eight.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of spines and things that adhere in the throat, and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times, things adhere in the throat, such as splinters or fish bones, or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore, you should extract what is apparent among them, with the view focused on it, since you press the tongue with an instrument just in front of it, so that you are made clear about what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	When that which is not apparent and hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, since violent retching causes the throat to open up; or have the patient swallow a piece of soap or rag of lye water or a hard piece of bread; or take a sponge soaked with dry sea salt, and push it forcefully into the mouth of the patient, for when it reaches the location where the spines are, they will be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Or take an eel and swallow it soaked in vinegar, and then it will be extracted through the anus; or take a cup and fill it with water and push it up the rectum to draw out the substance.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	Or if those causes are not resolved by the methods mentioned earlier, then use an instrument made of lead in this manner:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	Make it as thick as a finger, and on the end, there should be a concave indentation that can easily enter the throat.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	Hold the instrument upright and make sure that its tip touches the patient's throat bone, to ensure that it strikes only the bone or spine and not harm the patient, or let the doctor apply his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Or if the patient swallows the instrument, it is better that they do so, using their knowledge of the location of the attached cause and pushing down to extract it. The doctor should then pull the instrument upward, all according to the amount that has been prepared beforehand.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter thirty-nine.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood clots attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	If the treatment of blood clots with the remedies mentioned in the division of cure does not help, then consider looking inside the throat of the patient, as you have the appropriate instrument at hand.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	If you see the blood clot, extract it gently and carefully with a small or subtle tool.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If you cannot extract the blood clot, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient. Place a hot iron in the concavity of the cannula and apply it as many times as necessary (until the blood clot is dead and removed from the throat) and keep the patient away from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a water-filled syringe, open the mouth of the patient with it, and wash their mouth with it; do not allow any cause or contamination to enter the syringe and change the water once an hour, as the blood clot will soon detect the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If the patient has not been forgotten about what has been recommended, then fumigate the patient with cinnamon or asafoetida through the instrument that has been recommended for the fumigation of a uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	If you have done all that was prescribed, now fumigate the patient with cinnamon or asafoetida using the instrument that was recommended for fumigating a uvula.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another method of operation in fumigation is to take a bowl filled with ignited charcoal and cover it halfway with a cloth that has a hole in the middle where the end of the instrument should fit. Place the patient's mouth near the opening, clamp down on their mouth so the fumigation does not escape before you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodstream, because the bleeding will quickly stop.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If there is no improvement, repeat the fumigation several times and prevent the patient from drinking anything, make them eat salted foods and almonds, and do not let them drink water. It is essential that this dietary regimen is adhered to.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument used to treat bleeding from the ulcer when it occurs; it resembles forceps somewhat, but it has some curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The part of the instrument that is applied to the ulcer should be positioned towards the ulcer, and its end resembles a stork's beak, which is rounded and sharpened with a file, so it can grasp the cause without letting go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL:
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In it is the summary of the sermon on the opening and treatment of ulcers.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Ulcers are several species, of many kinds, according to what is remembered about them, in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	They differ in penetration and treatment by two ways, one of which is the type of ulcer itself; and because of what causes them to be filled with moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The second method is specific to locations where problems in the body occur, as an ulcer in the head is different from an ulcer in the buttocks; and an ulcer on a fleshy location is different from an ulcer at a joint. And each of them has its own treatment by means of operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some ulcers should not be perforated except for the maturation of the pus in them or their completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other ulcers that should be perforated when they become hard and are not matured according to their completion, such as ulcers near joints, because an ulcer near a joint lasts longer until the pus is drained from around it, and it corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of the affected limb; or if the ulcer is on a main member, and you delay the perforation too long, it will spread to other parts of the body; or is in the buttocks, so do not perforate an unripe one, but only the one that is near the buttocks, so as not to expose the anus and prolong its duration, causing a fistula or wound that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	It is important to know when to perform the perforation of the ulcer, which is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you will know that it has matured when there is relief from pain and the fever subsides, along with a decrease in redness and pulse, an increase in the head of the ulcer, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And because you should know how to pierce through below the abscess where pus comes out during the healing of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Perforation should be made through the length of the flesh or body, if abscesses are in the joints or limbs, and in the locations of the ligaments, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places that swell where there is no reflection. In those that reflect, use perforation according to each member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	However, when the abscess is in fleshy tissue, it is better to allow perforation until digestion of the pus has been confirmed, as we have said; for if you perforate it beforehand, the pus cavity extends and there is increased pain and inflammation, and the edges of the abscess become hardened and its depth increases.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Moreover, abscesses should be perforated according to the thickness of the flesh or body as needed, or according to the member that requires it.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	It is necessary to make small perforations, large and wide or many incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are the abscesses in which the cavity should be concaved and incised, when this is done, it is said that it is already healed, such as those that occur in double swellings or buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with a three-angled section; and of these is one in which it is incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf, such as the abscesses of gouty patients.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of these is one in which a round and crescent-shaped incision is administered, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	However, that which is not like the aforementioned are superficial abscesses of lions, and it is necessary to perforate it with superficial perforation or a simple one.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has collected pus, perforate it but do not be hasty to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted part of it, return the abscess to its place the next day, and extract a larger portion, and perform purgation in stages according to gradations until it is forgotten.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Furthermore, if the patient is suffering from a green jaundice, or a woman who is pregnant, or a small child, or an elderly person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit pus often resolves with the exit of pus, and the patient dies more quickly, so you should be cautious.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter and be cautious in your perforation of these abscesses, and when you perforate them, avoid contaminating the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or a simple one; if the abscess is large and the fissures of the perforation are numerous, it is necessary to be patient in each step until they meet.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if a portion of the abscess cavity is excised or you have concaved it in the surrounding area, it is necessary to seal it with old linen or thread made from cloth of him, such as when bandages or ointments are applied, without moisture; and leave it for three days; and process it and care for it until the inflammation has subsided.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	However, if bleeding occurs during the time of your operation, you should administer warm water and wine in which a cloth is steeped, and let it rest on the location of the bleeding for a while, watching carefully.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	However, if the bleeding persists, it is necessary to administer a treatment and care, and to apply the powders that have been recommended in various locations of this treatise and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	However, if it is winter and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, it is necessary to apply powder in wine and oil of caution, and let them rest on the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer, and the locations are fleshy, it is necessary to let powder steep in water or wine and oil, and all of this should be boiled until it becomes clear for three days, as we have said, and it is necessary to drain the abscess and clean it, and administer to it what is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the healing of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction I have already said about every abscess in a particular way for each chapter.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On incision of abscesses that come in the skull cavity.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the skull cavity are small abscesses of special types that contain tunics that they are formed from; and the types of their pus are numerous.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And some of them have blisters, and of these some contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those that contain moisture similar to powder, and resembling them; and of those that are lapidary, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there should be no fear, for the extraction of those does not oppose bow-making.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation in the section of those is that you use an instrument with a form similar to this, which is called scissors, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is moisture, then you cut it with the section according to its length and the superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And you begin at the line of .B and go to the line of .G. Therefore, when the moisture is evacuated, you excise that part which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of it, for too many observed cases return if there remains any cause of it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And apply warm Egyptian ointment to the wound if it is present, and if not, with water and salt; fill the wound with that, let it stay there for another day, because with this, all that remains of the skin will be corroded.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And apply warm Egyptian ointment to the wound repeatedly and cleanly if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of the skin; then heal the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess contains fatty nodes, you incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	With the section having a cross shape, and starting with an incision between the two lips of the section, you cut it from all sides, and apply your virtue in the extraction of the sheath that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your bow-making opposes this, do what I first told you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And do the same with the hardened abscess of section and healing as I first told you; but the section on a hardened abscess is easier, for it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Sometimes these abscesses are in the head in some men who have none of this moisture; this cause is because I incise an abscess in a woman's head as if it were a stone, rough, white, which could not be pierced, and if anyone struck it, it would infect him.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in the other abscesses that occur in the head, this is not part of this topic, such as the abscesses that come to the heads of children and you should remove the roots of the hairs, but the section of these all should be a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those from the lower parts of them to alleviate the body's pain at the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And apply what is suitable for its healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the section of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses often occur in the neck, and sometimes in the axilla and joints; and some occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck and most of them are generated between them, and all scrofula from these is first their own sheath, just like in nodes and abscesses of the head as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The species of these scrofulas are boils, for some are lapidary, and some contain moisture, and those that are malicious do not obey healing.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Thus, in the one that you see in good condition in the Touchement, whose color is similar to the hue of the cocaine, and is harmful throughout, and is not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to bow-making, and is not connected, it is necessary that you incise it with a superficial section from the upper part of the body to the lower part of the body, between the line of .G. and the line of .B., and cut it from all sides, and extract two lips of the cocaine or boils if necessary, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	It is more caution that the vein or nerve should not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	It is more advisable that the wound not be touched or pressed too hard, and do not press your hand on it to disturb the patient or cut what is unnecessary; for if you cut an artery or vein and prevent your operation, then pause in the cautery plaster or other powders which stop blood flow, and let the wound heal, and allow the abscess to rest so that its pain subsides and the plaster becomes thick.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the wound is drained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation before it's completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And check if there are any other small abscesses nearby; drain and clean them as well.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if the large abscess is near a vein, make sure not to cut it from its base.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before lifting, ensure that you fold it tightly and let it drop gently without harming it.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with old cloth that you have previously soaked in Egyptian ointment, and take care of it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you cut the entire abscess open, ensure that you close the lips of the wound and sew it as soon as possible to avoid any superfluous damage.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	However, if there is unnecessary damage due to the size of the abscess, then understand to cut the base of it, remove it and perform a stitch as mentioned.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	For abscesses that contain moisture, perform a superficial perforation where the maturation of the mass appears, and pause the perforation in the area of dry skin as mentioned above.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then administer the perforation with warm water and similar substances, in order to dissolve what was cut off from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound is cleaned, then take care of it with a healing ointment until it heals.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the incision of the phlegmon caused by the plague.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients used to perform this incision on the phlegmon, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the inscription of their speech.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men without skill, the extraction of the phlegmon should be avoided because it is not beneficial for the patient since all his veins and arteries are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have abscesses or phlegmons in the mouth or throat or ears, when the disease is not in the neck, it is necessary to perform an incision of phlegmon to avoid the danger that is caused by suffocation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do it, cut the phlegmon at least three circles of the phlegmon's circles or four with a small incision through the length in the one that is between two circles by size, and the incision should be in a concave area, not in cartilage. The location is appropriate for incision because it lacks skin and the veins and arteries are easily accessible there.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the doctor is inexperienced, it is necessary to extend the neck of the plague so that the neck opens, and then make an incision in the neck to reach the canal, but avoid the veins if possible.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then make an incision in the neck according to what we have recommended; it refers to the opening of the channel for the gland, which is the source of that fluid and the drainage of the throat.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, since the time has passed when perforation is feared, gather two lips of the neck of the wound, and sew only the skin without cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then administer medicines that promote healing until it heals.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Albucasis says that the essence of our speech is that the veins that some have opened the throat of the patient have already healed, and the patient has died. The cause of death was the obstruction of the airway, and others will cut the epiglottis to allow the patient to breathe through the wound for any respiration, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, I command to keep the wound open until the disease is consumed; and it takes three days for this; therefore, I command you to sew the wound only when it has healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	What I have seen through my experience is that a maidservant took a knife and put it in her own throat and cut a part of the windpipe, and I was called to treat him. She made groans like those of the dying, and I discovered the wound and saw the blood coming out from the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you were assured that she had not cut an artery or vein, and the air came out of the wound, and I healed it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	The maidservant did not need to return to the hospital if her throat was not swollen, and I advised her to rest for a few days.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Speak now and say there is no fear in the section of the epiglottis.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter xliV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	From the section of an abscess which occurs outside the throat and is called hernia of the tonsil. (Modern English)
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called hernia of the tonsil is large in size according to the complexion of the body, and it is dangerous for women (Modern English)
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	It occurs in two ways: either naturally or accidentally. (Modern English)
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	In the case of something occurring naturally, there is no need to treat it. (Modern English)
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	Accidental cases are of two types: one resembles swollen glands, and the other type resembles an abscess caused by constriction of an artery, in which case there is cause for concern. (Modern English)
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	It is not necessary to assume that it is a case of malignant tumor unless the size is small. (Modern English)
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	You should investigate this and determine if it resembles swollen glands that are not suspended from any veins. In such cases, you can then incise the growth in the same manner as lymph nodes and remove it along with the contents of the capsule; otherwise, you must carefully examine its entire structure, and apply treatment to the area until it heals. (Modern English)
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter xliV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the sections of swollen glands. (Modern English)
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the swollen glands, I have already mentioned all their varieties in the previous section. (Modern English)
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	It is necessary to distinguish between a swollen gland and an abscess with doubt (Modern English)
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, you say that an abscess is characterized by heat, fever, and intense pain until the ebullition of the superfluity has subsided; it is a complete purification that now stops the fever, pain, and heat (Modern English)
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	Conversely, a swollen gland does not present with heat, fever, or pain; rather, it contains a hard, round mass that is located deep inside (Modern English)
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	It depends on the constitution of the body, and it begins as a small raised area that is treated like a blister, either large or small, and they belong to two species: either fatty with moisture, whose coloration is dark due to my description in the previous section (Modern English)
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when treating a swollen gland, expose it and investigate the starting point of the tumor called intromes, depending on its shape as described in the relevant chapter (Modern English)
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	Examination method for abscesses and all kinds of nodes, it is that you take this tool and insert it into the wet location where the abscess is located, and you rotate your fingers around it little by little until you know that the tool has penetrated the skin.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then you approach your hand according to the size of the abscess and then extract the pus and consider that it is exited in the trace of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if there is excess fluid, of any color, then you incise it with a superficial cut as you have said for other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is no fluid coming out of the abscess, then you know it is hard.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	Dry it on it with a cross-shaped incision according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	So as you have been taught, suspend it with a thread, and remove the skin all around it with ease, and keep the fat or membrane on top of it, if possible, and drain the pus from the abscess.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract the healthy part, and then you must cauterize it, and you should remove it in pieces until there remains no cause for it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If some or too much of the abscess remains, the abscess returns more.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you see that some small part remains, then fill the wound with some sharp and corrosive powders and burn the wound, place a plaster over the abscess to prevent it from returning, and cure it with another remedy until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If the abscess is large, you must cut the two lips of it and cure it with whatever remedy it requires.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the vein pulses to the contrary, or not at all, you must tie it and fill the wound with vinegar three times diluted that is vitriol and hold it tight for two or three days until the wound heals and the boiling of the blood stops; then return to incise what was broken from the abscess.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of the tools necessary for cuts and perforations.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these there are three forms of abscesses, the large one, the middle-sized one, and the small one.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of a large abscess is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of a middle-sized abscess is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of a small abscess is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They should be made of iron, copper, or sharp-edged handles for the sake of entering the abscesses easily.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of experienced persons, and they are named albered (lancet), and one of them is called berid (probe).
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three types, for large, middle-sized and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large albered (lancet), shape of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of a middle-sized albered (lancet), shape of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small albered (lancet), shape of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	They should be used for abscesses, fistulas, ulcers and buboes to enter them since they are of bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	They should be round, large, lion-shaped or as big as needles with their heads covered in wax and made of horn, copper, iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of horn.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	They should be made by experienced people with black feathers, who agree that they should open the fistulas in the concavity of which there are reflections, which are reflected by their lightness onto those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three types, for some of them are long, others middle-sized, and others short, according to the size of the fistula and its narrowness.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of a large lead weight (or heavy object):
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of a heavier lead weight (or object):
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of a smaller lead weight (or object):
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of scissors are various, for some of them are simple with just a single curve, and they come in three types: large, few (or fewer), and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And the blades have three types: curved, straight, and pointed.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And from those scissors some have two curves, and they come in three types:
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And from those scissors some have three curves, and they come in three types:
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All of those are necessary for their use.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a large simple scissor, form of it (the scissor):
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium-sized simple scissor:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a few (or fewer) simple scissors, form of it (the scissor):
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large curved scissor (or scissors with a single curve):
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a medium-sized curved scissor (or scissors with a single curve), form of it (the scissor):
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a few (or fewer) curved scissors (with single curve), form of it (the scissor):
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large scissor with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium-sized scissor with two curves (or bends):
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a few (or fewer) scissors with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large scissor with three curves (or bends):
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a medium-sized scissor with three curves (or bends):
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a few (or fewer) scissors with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the shapes of scalpels with which knots and abscesses are cut, and there are three types: large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Large scalpel form:
Forma del scapel migier:	Medium scalpel form:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Small scalpel form:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those which are cut open are sharp, and the other extremities are not punctured in this manner but rather done in conjunction with the excision of knots to avoid injury to a vein or nerve. This is so that the patient may be healed and brought some peace through cautery, which is necessary for the excision of an abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the shapes of alum blocks, and there are three types: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of a large alum block:
Forma de magda migier:	The shape of a medium-sized alum block:
Forma de magda pauc:	The shape of a small alum block:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made from earth, and resemble glass with which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	The pointed edge of the spatula should be inserted into the incision and then pushed inward and outward as desired.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of spatulas, which are meant for piercing abscesses without causing harm to the patient and are available in three types: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the shapes of those things:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of drains, which are used to remove blood flow, come in three types: large, medium, and small. The shapes are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of earth and round with some length, and they should be fine.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	You must have these types of drains: large, medium, and small, because for larger wounds that require quick removal of blood flow, you may use them in the absence of medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, you should not use them to drain blood in any part of the body, but rather only in fleshy areas such as underarms, thighs, armpits, breasts, stomach, and genitals, similar to their fleshy counterparts (in Spanish).
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some wounds are made with smaller instruments similar to fish scalpels in the following form for draining blood when done by phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery (in Spanish).
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some observations are made in round shapes according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts, which resemble those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some observations show that men's breasts become swollen like those of women and should be treated with rest as they begin to itch, and the swollen breasts are to be compared to those of women, and we do not touch them.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for the one who has this condition, it is necessary to make an incision in the swollen breast along this line, from point B to point G, and remove all the growth, apply a layer of carnation medicine to the wound, sew the two lips of the wound together with sutures, and care for it until it heals.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines towards the nipples and is softened like in women, then it should be cut in two, with its upper parts separated into two crescents resembling a half-moon shape, each of which is contained within the other so that the larger one contains the smaller according to this pattern from point B and point G. Then remove the cord, clear the pus, administer what was said about suturing and powders necessary for the healing until it heals.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision that is necessary to make because of the patient's agitation and bleeding, then you must fill the wound with a warm poultice of corrosive oil and leave it until the oil dissolves the hardened matter, and take care of it until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the perforation of abscesses that appear at the nipples.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that appear at the nipples belong to the species of scrofula, hard ones, which contain a pus sac.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of these contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a half-moon shape along this line: from point G to point B. And when all the pus in the abscess is evacuated, you fill it with warm oil and leave it until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Then cover the wound and heal it with appropriate oil until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the abscess is of the species of lymph nodes or scrofula, then you cut it as was said in the section about scrofula similarly.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the wound is extended and has become purulent, then administer cautery as was said before in this discussion.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On incision of abscesses that occur due to archery or vein injuries.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow is broken and the surrounding cord is consolidated, it often causes an abscess. And the signs by which inflammation and abscess are recognized as being due to an artery or vein: for when an abscess occurs due to an arrow, it is long attached to the chest; and if you probe the abscess with your fingers, you feel a grinding sensation.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	The one caused by a vein is round in the appearance of the chest.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Making an incision on this abscess is a mistake, especially in the axilla, neck, and other parts of the body; and it is dangerous, so its treatment with iron should be avoided, and the one in the extremities or head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But on the one that is due to inflammation of the opening of the arrow, cut the surrounding tissue in length; then separate it with scissors and remove the arrow, and peel off the sheath until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And place a needle on top of it and make it penetrate through the other side, and grasp the arrow with double force in two places, which causes you to extract two arrows that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And pierce the location between two ligaments with a lance until all the blood that is in it comes out, and the abscess is resolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And apply treatment to the area where purulence is generated, and heal it with appropriate oil until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If it is an abscess due to vein incision, then you must have your hand on the abscess and surrounding tissue, and place the needle next to the location where you have your hand. Then pierce it; the thread should be doubled until you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess with a strong ligament as I told you in the uva4 ligament of two parts with two ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear pulling the thread, then place the needle next to the entire abscess and make the first incision of the needle, and grasp the thread with four fingers.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Approach the abscess at its base where it is situated, and when what is inside it has come out, then you incise the redundancy of the skin and leave what remains attached.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then pause over the swelling that you have immersed in wine and oil, and apply the cure which is prepared with warm water and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the abscess which occurs due to a twist in the nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, when an abscess occurs in the arch and vein, and a similar abscess occurs in the nerves when it occurs due to excessive work or trauma, and so on.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	The abscess should be drained in the locations of the joints or the ankle, or in any place where the joints are diseased.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	A severe abscess, resembling the color of another body, is in the larger parts of it and when it is tightened with great force, the patient experiences a feeling similar to stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	An abscess is not aggregated in the front of the body and therefore the skin should be left intact, and it is rotten all over and does not move forward or backward.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those who are in the joints should not be wrapped with iron, because a strong heat will lead to contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But one who is in the head or forehead breaks the skin with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a small abscess, then take him with forceps and incise it from the edge.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then hang him upside down and excise it, and cover the wound; stitch the wound with sutures, and cure it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 11
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	From incision of abscess which occurs due to the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Examine closely many men who are observed in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies which are called fungus-like because they resemble those with fungus, whose roots are subtle and the head is large; and their lips have already been turned over, and it is one that is small and another that is greatly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	I have seen one and in his belly there were two that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between them as they were white and of small roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those were turned over and split open, and moisture flowed out of it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, incise them and bind one in the foot with eighteen ounces. and the other with six ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	The operation in incision of theirs is that you consider if the patient is humid and the appearance of the abscess is white, moist, and fine roots; then you incise it with a sharp blade, and there should be cauterization in your presence because many watched the incision of it will expel much blood, and if there is bleeding, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is poor and fearful, guard against incision with iron; but take a fresh leaden plaster, apply it to that abscess, following the method mentioned earlier, and let it remain for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And apply the string of lead to its stitching; therefore, you must not cease to strengthen the large lead in that abscess until it is incised and falls off by itself without work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the abscess is of large roots, incision of it is a cause of fear and anxiety, especially in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you incise the bulk of it, and then cauterize it to prevent its return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And cure it until the wound heals.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware of incising an abscess that is black in color, of little sensation, of low regulation, because it is a cancerous abscess.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	I will come with the reminder of cancer regarding this matter.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 12
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the urgent care of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The protrusion at the navel is caused by various reasons: either due to a fissure in the navel located on the stomach, and outflow of tissue or intestine as it does in other ruptures; or by bleeding which flows from a vein or an artery as previously mentioned, or by constrained congestion in that area.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to a fissure in the navel and outflow of tissue, then the color of the abscess resembles that of the body; and it lion-like in pain, and it appears in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is due to the herniation of the intestine, then place that area with the one that you have previously noted, in a more pronounced position, and as you press on it, it will be hidden; and it is advisable to introduce hot water and intense work there.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If due to moisture, then it is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor constrained, nor hardened.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If due to bleeding, then the abscess appears darker, descending in color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is a matter of necrotic flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large and hard, and fixed in place by a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to congestion, then the touch is painful.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in that place is to consider whether the protrusion at the navel is due to bleeding from an artery, or a vein, or congestion; and if this is the case, then care must be taken in treating it, as fear and alarm are present there, as previously mentioned in the chapter where abscesses from an artery and vein have been discussed.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the protrusion at the navel is due to the intestine or tissue, then you must command the patient to lie down and extend themselves; and place your hand around the entire navel, and command them to remain facing upwards between your hands, and place a broad spatula around the navel on the location you have pointed out; and stretch the abscess towards the sides upwards as much as possible; and bind it in the circumference with firm thread or cord, and tie it in a manner that is appropriate.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And bind the edge of the extended abscess on the wound and introduce your finger into that indicated place, and if you have not found or guarded it by the wound, then you extract the intestine and force it to the sides inside the stomach.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the tissue, then take it with one hand; and cut away any superfluities of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your artery or vein, then you surround that area and return to your operation; take two needles and put them in the strongest thread, and pierce the circuit around the abscess in a cross-shaped manner, which you make penetrate; and tighten the abscess in four parts on the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and let the extended flesh fall by itself; or cut that which is thin and can be pierced, and take care of it with ointments until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the protrusion at the navel is due to necrotic flesh or moisture, then you must cure it as previously mentioned and remove the pus or moisture that has formed there, and take care of it with ointments until it heals and consolidates the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 33.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	It has already been said in the division, about the species of cancer and how one should proceed with the treatment of it using medicines, and that it is harmful to cure it with iron because it is ulcerated; and it has been said that cancer is generated by the laziness and carelessness of the treatment of it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancients said that in some cases cancer can be eradicated where it is possible to remove it, as in the case of the cancer of the head which occurs on the breasts or in the groin and its similar members, and more so when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, it is not advisable to try to cure it because one cannot heal it nor have I seen anyone else do so, or that it has not been achieved at all.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in that place is as previously said, to prepare and let the patient rest and purge from black bile for some days, and then fumigate it if there is a clear repletion.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And prepare the patient with appropriate preparation for the operation, and prohibit any urinating for some days, and bend their back well using a good traction until no reason for the pain remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Let the blood flow, and do not open the wound lightly, but squeeze the places, and wash away all the thick blood with your hand or the instrument that you can use among the available instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it goes against your intention to remove thick blood from a vein or an artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood ceases, and take care of it with other treatment until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Title (Chapter) .liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	Here is a rough translation of the given text:
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	That which is treated with iron is only the type of edema known as althitas, and it is not appropriate to use iron in the treatment of the types of edema known as timpanistres or yposarcha, for those are fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have treated this type of edema timpanistre with medicines and it does not improve, then consider the following: if the patient has already become weakened or has another type of edema such as those found in the lungs or abdomen, for example, then be cautious about using iron, for there is a fear of it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if the patient is strong in nature and there is no other disease except edema alone, and neither a child nor an old person, then the method of the operation is that you elevate the patient with your hands, and administer to them the appropriate medicine for their belly with your hand, press the water out of the lower abdomen, and take sponges made of thorns in this manner:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	The sponges should be made of two sharp points that are pointed like needles, but they should be short in some way, so as not to enter the intestine or perforate it during the operation.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Then consider whether the generation of edema is from the intestines, for if so, then you must be at least three fingers width away from the navel during the incision, on the right side above the lower abdomen.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of edema is due to a liver disease, then make your incision to the left of the navel for three fingers' width.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation is from the spleen, then make the incision on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And ensure that your incision is made over the ribs where you want the patient to lie, so as not to cause excessive swelling at that location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then pierce the skin with your instrument and enter the incision, raise your hand with the sponge between the skin and fat layer, and remove it; if necessary, take out a fingernail or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then penetrate the fat layer to reach the sponge at the desired location, which is the watery place.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And take out that sponge and insert an instrument with this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver, copper, or brass, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other. The end is sharp like a pen, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end of the instrument is an armlet, for when the instrument reaches the water, you must quickly tighten it on the instrument so as to evacuate the correct amount of water at once, because if you evacuate any more than necessary in the same hour, the patient may die due to resolution of their animal spirit, or they may succumb to shock which is close to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate as much as the strength of the patient allows and according to your assessment of their pulse and overall condition.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And remove the instrument, and retain the water that caused the swelling, which should be immediately stopped by the skin which seals the hole that was made in the fat layer, as recommended to you.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And repeat the procedure on another day if the patient tolerates it, extract a small amount of water, and do so for several days as a precaution, and be careful not to leave too much water behind.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you are concerned about the patient and let out a large amount of water, then cure it with burial in hot sand, massage the wound with warm water, and wait for a long time under the sun; treat it with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	Cauterize on the stomach, and apply the spleen and the bladder close to the water extraction, as you have reported in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	When cauterizing the stomach, bring the spleen and bladder near for the extraction of water, as previously discussed.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the treatment of children whose places of urine are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes, one of the children is born from the mother's womb and the head of its mixion (or it is pulled tightly or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it must be cauterized with perforation as soon as possible according to this method:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Place a thin leaden pin in the narrowed place and tie it there for three days or more.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when it wishes to urinate, it is emptied and returned.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If the leaden pin is not removed, there is a possibility that the urine flowing over the area will not enter this opening.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	The narrowed one that was pierced should be treated with a leaden pin, as we said, for many days until it is expanded.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Those in whom the narrowed one is not in its place are lethargic, and this is due to those whose narrowed ones were pierced, because the newborn must have the head of the penis cut off so that it cannot urinate between the legs until it raises the penis with its hand above the legs; and this is not for reproduction, because the sperm cannot reach the mother as required, and it is a serious illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method for the operation is to turn the patient on his back, and with your left hand you should grasp the head of the penis with a firm pull, and cut off the tip of the glans of the penis at the foreskin with a sharp instrument, like a feather, or any other blade, so that the meatus of it falls in its place as necessary.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	Be careful in your operation for blood flow, because it often happens that this occurs; and pause at this point until the bleeding stops, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	On the white spot that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, on corruption and blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Often this white spot occurs on the penis and is a protrusion of foul flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one is malignant, and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant: it is necessary to suspend a thin thread and cut off the ulceration until it is completely cleaned; then pause over the sunken area and apply Egyptian ointment on it; then, apply daily fine ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the ulceration is malignant and has a yellowish-green color, then you must administer cauterization near the incision and ligation of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	However, if the ulceration is in the foreskin at the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulceration is within the foreskin and the other part is outside, you must remove the inner ulceration until it is consolidated; then cure the outer part, because when you treat the foreskin, it cannot be ensured that it will not be infected.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And now it happens in the genitals and prepuce darkening and corruption, therefore you should concave everything that has been sullied or is about to become corrupt or is corrupted; and apply linens on top of it, which is soaked with a paste made from barley flour and three kinds of herbs crushed and ground.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Then treat that with the other cure until it becomes healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if blood flow occurs, then administer a lunar cauterization in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	The cautery is helpful in two positions at the same time: for blood flow and for wounds that are rotten.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is rotten and destroyed completely at that time, you must insert a lead cannula into the foreskin to allow the patient to urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those for whom the foreskin is healthy, and where circumcision has not been performed; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess) you must use a blunt spatula to separate it until the pus is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to separate it expertly, you must use a spatula of some sort on the head of the penis and the foreskin, because the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily perforated due to its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin knife that has been softened in water to prevent them from sticking together again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then let it be treated with a healing ointment until it is solidified.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 77.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of children and the treatment of those who suffer from circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to continuous problems like other diseases: however, since it is of our action and will, and the patient is specifically children, it is necessary to assign to it the best operation and way that is as easy as possible while preserving their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, they did not speak of circumcision in any of their books, because it was not used in their laws, and only because they had learned about its benefits through experience, which cause I have found that the majority of craftsmen and barbers perform circumcision and purification with a new knife and torches; and they use ointment and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already prohibited all these methods and not found a better purification with scissors, ointment, nail, or incision as in circumcision, because many times the skin is damaged more than before, because the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and the upper layer remains, and it is easily punctured again and causes certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the purification that is done for alphecati, and is digital, which is performed by shoemakers, is not secure due to the incision of the tip of the male member, because it easily enters into the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the nail, you will observe rust and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The skin of the child is short by nature, and many times it is in this manner that there is no need for purification, and I have seen it.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But the purification performed with scissors and ointment with the nail is not good, because I have found through experience that scissors are of proportional incision, so the sharpness above is the same as the sharpness below; therefore, when you press your hand proportionately with two sharp points, you incise accordingly at a certain time; and it is performed compression of the ointment with a figure containing the skin of the penis from all sides, with which there is no error in total.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you make the child stay for a longer time if it is one of those who understand a little, and do not do anything except put the ointment on the penis alone, and let it stay inside for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And you must take care of him in all the way that is possible according to his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And you must keep him among your most prepared things and not be absent; hide the scissors in your hand or put them under your foot, so that the child does not see them or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And you must put your hand on the penis of him and blow on the skin, and pull it out so that the head of the penis comes out, and then purify that which is attached to it with filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And you must fold the place marked with the ointment and tie it with a small piece of cloth soaked in the same ointment, and then hold it tightly with your hand and place the ointment at the base of the cloth, and incise between two ointments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you must gently lift the skin and stretch the head of the penis, let the blood flow little by little, which is better; then stop the powder on top and over the powder place a cloth soaked in honey water known as "huou coyt" boiled recently oil; and leave it on top for another day; and treat it with treatment until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of forceps should be modified; this is the shape: [The text does not specify what the shape should be modified to or why.]
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The handles of the forceps should not be sharp and the other ones should be sharp; the ram of the clamp should not protrude, and both tips should have a length equal to that of two handles joined together. [The text describes the desired modification of the shape of the handles and the ram of the forceps.]
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	However, the error in modification is that it completely obliterates the internal hinge or requires an incision to be made. [The text explains a potential issue with the modification of the forceps.]
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you must extend your finger in front of the incision at the site and make the incision according to a set measurement. [The text provides instructions for making an incision.]
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot keep your finger on the incision, then make it with a scalpel and cut it open. [The text provides an alternative method for making the incision.]
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and the swelling remains after the incision, you must loosen what is swollen inside the wound with a probe, cauterize it carefully, excoriate it easily, and cut it open according to your preparation. [The text provides further instructions for dealing with a persistent infection.]
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the wound, as it will not heal there. [The text advises caution when treating the head of the wound.]
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And so, treat it with a poultice made from the powders you recommended in the treatise on powders. [The text recommends using a poultice to heal the wound.]
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if the incision is made within proper limits and you follow the divisions above, there will be no complications. [The text reassures that following the instructions will lead to successful treatment.]
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But if it does not heal as we said, treat it accordingly. [The text acknowledges that there may still be complications or failure in the healing process.]
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII. [The text number has been added to indicate the chapter number; the original text did not include numbers for chapters.]
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder. [The text provides instructions on treating a condition related to the bladder and urinary system.]
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction, either from a stone or clotted blood, or from pus or a tumor, and resembles those described in the section on methods of treatment. [The text explains the cause of retention of urine in the bladder.]
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and retention of urine persists due to a stone that is in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be placed on their back. [The text provides instructions for dealing with a particular cause of bladder obstruction.]
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Place the patient's legs on a pillow or some other soft support and extend their abdomen from the area above their back, making them arch their back as much as possible. [The text provides further instructions for positioning the patient to alleviate discomfort.]
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, you must squeeze the neck of the bladder to expel the stone through the back passages, allowing the urine to be released. [The text provides instructions for treating the condition caused by a bladder stone.]
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If the stone is not dissolved by the methods we have described and the condition becomes severe in the patient, it is necessary to administer extraction using an instrument called a syringe, which has the following shape: It should be made of silver and be long and slender, similar to the cannula of a bird's feather with a subtle length equal to about one and a half palms, with a narrow tube at its tip. [The text provides instructions for using a syringe to remove the bladder stone.]
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	The method of emptying the urine through the syringe is to take the fiel folded and placed in the wool or hide for good lubrication; then insert the extremities of the fiel into the area behind the syringe, and cut it open with forceps if any cause of the wool requires it, but insert the wool into the cannula with force. Then move the syringe forward and apply oil and albumen to the area. [The text provides further instructions for using the syringe.]
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	Place the patient on a couch and wrap the bladder and wound with oil-soaked cloths and olive oil and alum. [The text provides additional instructions for treating the condition.]
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the syringe gently until it reaches the wound; fold the wound over above the anus and push the syringe into that area; then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, which should alleviate the pain caused by the stone. Do not do this in reverse order, but rather enter through the place of curvature. [The text provides further instructions for using the syringe.]
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Then extend the wool slowly, as the urine will soak up the wool. [The text explains that the extended wool will absorb the urine.]
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then remove the stone and treat for urinary issues using a syringe, continue to do so until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief. [The text concludes its instructions on treating retained urine in the bladder.]
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX. [The text number has been added to indicate the chapter number; the original text did not include numbers for chapters.]
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of clysterization of the bladder with a clamp and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose. [The text provides instructions on using certain instruments to perform clysterization, or the introduction of liquid into the body.]
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	If ulceration, abscess, or clotted blood occurs in the bladder, or there is a tumor, and you want to distill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clamp and this is its shape: [The text provides instructions on using a specific instrument for clysterization.]
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	Unless there is a hole in the area, it is closed. [The text describes a feature of the clamp.]
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three cuts: two from one side, thus as sometimes seen.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the hollow place (wound), there is something that has been pushed in, as much as can be tolerated without causing further injury, until any cause of its swelling is removed, and when it is expelled, it should be replaced with something, and when it is expelled completely, with a plug made of cloth soaked in naphta used for battles at sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	When you want to stop moisture in the bladder, insert the end of the plug into the moisture and push it towards the upper parts, because the moisture is pushed into the concavity of the plug.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the end of the plug into the anus according to what we have recommended in the clyster; then push the moisture out with something that pushes it, because the moisture reaches the bladder immediately and causes pain to the patient.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the clyster is thin, with which the bladder is irrigated, and it is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	It should be made of silver or lead, with a head shaped like a small feather and a hollow canal inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder of motion (bowel), and place in it the moisture you want to irrigate the bladder with, then tie it tightly with two strong ligatures and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the end of the clyster into the anus.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then press your hand on the bladder with the moisture and structure inside it until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If the bladder is not present, you should take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; then perforate its entire circumference; and insert a strong file into those cuts, as if it were rotating; then add the circle in such a way that it is joined together like a pin-prick, but stop at the place you want to take moisture from, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then you tie the parchment in the instrument as you did with the bladder, and express it with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LX (60)
De extraccio de peyra.	Of stone removal.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and stones formed in the bladder, as well as their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said that stone removal requires surgical operation and sectioning (cutting).
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone formed in the bladder itself is the one that is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And we are describing it with clear and concise demonstration.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it is mainly seen in children; its signs are that the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety and appears in sand; the patient presses their anus, and it moves a lot, and it becomes distended; and with this, the rectum opens up frequently.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	Recovery from this condition is usually achieved before the age of 14 in children, and it is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	However, in young people, it can be cured by what follows.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which has a larger stone and easier healing; if it is less, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we begin healing that one, first, we must clean the patient with a syringe which extracts all the wound which is in their hernias; for that wound sometimes prevents the emergence of the stone, so we must investigate for it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then place the patient with their feet and be flat and prostrate on a bed so that the stone descends towards the opening of the bladder, or sometimes it may come out from its location.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then prepare that basin between your hands and have the patient's legs apart, so that the bladder is fully opened, leaning towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then pierce it and empty it all out.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the stone in the space, then you should quickly make an incision over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If it does not come out completely by itself with your touch, then you must anoint it with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or with flour if they are a grown man, and insert it into their rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Then pierce the stone again that was inside.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually turn it back into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on it with your hand and expel it outwards through the place from which you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the servant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another servant with his right hand to spread the thighs apart above, and with his other hand raise the loincloth which is below the thighs, in the part where the incision was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And insert a spatula of this type into it (the bladder):
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	Cut it in such a way that it is between the rectum and the thighs, not at the same location, but to the side of the left thigh; and make the incision over the stone and your hand should be in the rectum, and make the incision transversely so that the incision outside is wide and inside narrow, according to the amount by which the stone was protruding from it, and not more, because excessive compression of your hand in the rectum should be avoided due to difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	Know that there are some stones that have an edge and corners, because the removal of them is difficult because of it.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of those ones, there are some that have a lion-like shape similar to a plum and are round, and easily come out.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	If it is one with edges and corners, align it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If it is not easily removed, then you must clamp down on it or apply pressure on it properly, the end of which should be like a file on the stone and not escape from it; or insert a subtle tool with a curved end underneath it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do so, then increase the pressure on it a little, and if there is bleeding, cauterize it with sharp vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, first press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, then insert and cut it; and do the same for more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is large, ignorance is that you cut it with a large incision because it may cause two things to happen to the patient: either they die or it leads to continuous urine distillation due to the fact that the location is not fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer the removal from inside it that is not difficult, or clamp down on the fracture of it with pliers to extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	And when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with ointment of aloes and dragon's blood, and cauterize it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	Place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil and water, on it to allow the cauterized wound to heal properly.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then reposition the patient on their back, and do not remove the liniment for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you remove it, wash the area with water and a little oil, and care for it with ointment diaphoretic and anti-diarrheal until it heals.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if there is cauterized or corrosive suppuration in the wound, and it resembles blood being congealed in the bladder (and that is known as urine retention), then insert your hand into the wound and extract the blood, because if it remains, it causes the bladder to rot and putrefy.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And wash the wound with saltwater, vinegar, and any opposition to all species suitable for healing until it heals.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during the entire healing process, you must lie down and adjust the medications that have been placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and is in the flesh of the penis and it prevents urination (and that is known as urine retention), then heal it with what I recommended before you resort to cutting, because excessive use of this cure can be dangerous; and I have already said that, and it is that you take a metal probe, the shape of which is:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	from a sharp triangular extension, inserted into a rod.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take the iron (or instrument), and tie it to that place below the pelvis in order that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron (or instrument) into the pelvis, piercing with ease until it reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Turn the drill with your hand in that small stone and gradually pierce it, and you will perform the perforation until the other part enters; for the urine is soon released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand on what is broken off from the split stone, as it is cracked and forgotten about with the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	However, if this cure is not suitable for any reason that prevents it, then tie a rope around the stone, and another rope above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then cut (or break) the stone in that pelvis between two layers.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then loosen the ligament and separate the clotted blood from the wound, which is made in the bladder.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	A ligament is not necessary around the stone, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder; the other ligament above it, for when the rope is loosened near the edge of the stone, the wound heals and the stitch is removed.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	The reason why you need the ligament above is that you should raise the wound at the edges, or else it will fall back and heal in this way as we said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 11.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	However, if a stone is seen in any of these, the cure is difficult and forbidden because of many complications.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman is very young.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who knows how to examine herself if she sends it to the doctor while she is chaste or from married women.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that you do not have a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with more care.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth reason is that the location of the incision for the stone in women is a long distance from the location of the stone, so it requires careful cutting and there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	However, if necessity requires it, you must take a woman who is very knowledgeable and rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	However, if you lack it, then seek out one who is skilled and subtle, or present a married woman experienced in the care of women, or a woman who has divided the art in part.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So present it and command it to do all that you will tell it, from the examination of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is that it must examine whether the woman is a virgin, in which case you should have her put her hand in her bottom and wish for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	So if it is found, detach it from its place, and then command it to examine it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	However, if it is not a virgin, command the woman to insert her hand in the patient's bottom and examine the stone, with her left hand pressed against the bladder, and compress it well.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	So if it is found, you must carefully remove it from the opening of the bladder to its edges with the aid of its virtue until it reaches the recognition of the matter.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then examine the matter of the stone at some point with the aid of the patient's hand, and place the stone in that area, and its name should not be removed from the stone when it is detached below it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	The incision should be shallow at first; and then make an incision over that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to the size of the stone which you know will be extracted from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	You should know that the stones of the bladder are gravel: for one of them is small and round, sharp and rough, long and round, and they have hollows.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	I suppose you know that the stones of the bladder are gravel: for one of them is small and round, sharp and rough, long and round, and they have hollows. (I tried to keep the original structure as much as possible.)
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you see a flow of blood, apply vinegar-soaked cotton there for an hour until the bleeding stops and then return to your operation until the stone is passed. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	Prepare the instruments that are used for removing stones in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see a flow of blood and know that the expulsion of blood is caused by an arrow wound that is inserted, then stop the bleeding with powder (pausa polvera) on the area, apply pressure with pulvils and constricting bandage (e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent), but do not attempt to remove the stone; leave it alone, as strong bleeding may kill the patient. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
E aprop cura la plagua.	Treat the wound. (A simple translation, based on the meaning of "cura" in this context.)
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Wait a few days until the wound heals and then return to your operation until the stone is passed. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
Capitol lxii.	Title 62. (The numbering suggests this might be part of a longer work, but it's unclear without more context.)
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On incision for strangulated hernia. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A strangulated hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white cheek which contains the intestine's pouch (genetius), and it is called a cheek (ciphac). (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Sometimes, it is in the fatty tissue itself (le propri pannicol) which nature has prepared in the hernia area until it becomes another hernia; and this is the intestine's pouch between the white cheek that we have mentioned earlier, but it is not correct to call it that. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the intestines (genetius), which causes this material to accumulate there; sometimes it happens due to a blow inflicted on the intestines. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This moisture has stones of different colors: the color of some is turning yellow (citrina), or bloody red (sanguinent) or pink, or black and foul-smelling (negra feculenta), or white (ayguosa blanqua), and these are the more dangerous ones. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows where this accumulation of water is located are as follows: if it is in the white cheek that we have mentioned earlier, then the abscess (apostema) is round and slightly elongated like a pouch (figura de huou), and the intestine appears, for the moisture contains it all over. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the moisture is in the fatty tissue itself, then the abscess (apostema) is round with a partition of the pouch and, therefore, it is estimated that it is another hernia. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the moisture is between the intestine's pouch and the white cheek, then cut down on it (catz dejos le centiment). (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	To know the color of the moisture, you must express the color of the moisture in the abscess by cutting through it where its shape is preceded; and according to what appears inside this test, judge what is contained within. (This is a guess; the original text may need further context or interpretation.)
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of him who is ill, it is necessary that we command the patient to be bled if it is possible for you, and sometimes empty his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then place something soft under his back on some cause, and place wet cloths over him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then place yourself on the left side of him, and command the servant to follow on his right, who will extend his staff from two fingers at the hips to the opening of the groin and to the border of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a wide strip of linen and divide the opening of the groin from the middle to the pubis approximately.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Make the incision in a straight line equidistant from the line that should follow the pubic hair, until it reaches the white chip reaching.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Peel that out, observe it, and be careful not to cut yourself; and your incision with which you peeled it off should appear separated. Suspend it using the thinnest thread and examine it carefully against the incision according to the quantity that is possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then pierce the bladder full of water with a wide hole and drain all the water out.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate between two labia of the incision with stitches, and extend the bladder at its edges; do not touch the area of the groin, but pierce the bladder in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Pierce it completely or in pieces and especially its thin side, because if you do not examine the incision of him carefully, it is not certain that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the wound is processed from outside the bladder at the time of your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the bladder, return it inside, and then suture the two labia of the groin with stitches, and care for that area as for other wounds, until it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the bladder corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you remove the instruments used as suspenders, and take out the bladder, and care for that area as we said before.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is collected in two places, you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did in the other one. And if it appears to be an operation, then you perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And you bind the blood, and enter into the incisions with wool soaked in oil or red oil; then put another wool which you have soaked in wine and oil over two thighs and the belly; and place blankets doubled and pulverized on top of them, and lay that over a cloth made according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and bind two clothes and fill them with wool in this manner; and make the ends which are pressed by hand or damp wool, and attach them to the body with a structure in the pockets of the underpants. One end takes hold of the buttock between the thighs, and the other at the border of the pubis, and two ends on each side on the thighs, and all the edges are sewn together into the pockets of the underpants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with caution in place of incision with iron; and you take a subtle surgical cautery and incise the groin area, and ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white bladder containing the water is discovered. Then you take the cautery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it resembles the Greek letter "gamma".
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And pierce that bladder and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the bladder with stitches, peel it off with stitches, and peel it off with a thin cautery ignited; incise it as possible for you until you remove all of it; and be careful that the fire does not touch the water.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more secure and longer lasting than bleeding, and better than incision surgery.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if it happens that you encounter an abscess in the time of incision or cauterization, or bleeding, then it is necessary that you treat the abscess according to what is said for that.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation according to what I recommend; and it is when you are sure, by what has been said about signs, that this hernia is hydropic.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	It is necessary that you raise the patient over some raised platform, pierce the abscess in the lowest part of it with a wide strip of linen, and stop the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	The incision should be wide enough for all the water to flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And place it over the area and hold it down, so that the remaining water runs out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And care for that area until the wound heals.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is an obstruction of the water in that time when you perforate it: and this is not done except because the white panniculus in the orifice of the wound causes obstruction and prevents the flow of water, then you must put a plaster or instrument into the wound which extracts the water from the hydrotic, as described earlier; or sew the incision in its opening with a small suture.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	Know that water returns, and is confined for about two months or more; and when it has been confined, then it should be perforated according to the aforementioned method, because the patient will thus spend their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capsule LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the section regarding fleshy hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section regarding this hernia, there is great fear of danger in the larger procedures; therefore, I advise against it and believe in saving the patient by a better method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation in that case, and the types of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	So, say that abscesses arise in the bodies of those in whom the genitals are composed and this is done for many reasons: either due to acute sharp anger which is poured into the genitals, or due to injury.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	The color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not found in pain, and this is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	A flat abscess is severe, of which the color is dark, and it should not be touched.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Sometimes it is made by a node in the arteries, and by inflammation of those in which the memory of it has already been perceived, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is due to inflammation of the arteries can be recognized by the dispersal of the abscess when it is pressed with fingers; and it should not be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is made by inflammation of a vein should not be dispersed from it for any reason by compression with fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that this type of abscess can be cut open and others on the body; and you should incise the veins of the genitals, and place the oil at the openings above, and extract that from the white cavity, and detach the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, and tie them, and incise the suspensory again once you have detached it from all parts of the opening of the oil.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	So, if the oil has been consolidated with the fatty tissues, then you should extract the oil and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is an adhesion due to some cause within the white cavity, or between the vessels, then you should remove all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if it is a growth of flesh at the site of the adhesion which is behind it, then you should incise everything that is from it and extract the oil as previously stated.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So, when your operation is complete, you should fill the wound with wool soaked in oil and wine, and care for it with other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capsule LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the cure of hernia that is from a wound.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	A wound is an abscess enclosed by some cover resembling a bubble with the softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult exercise and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, there is fear due to which its memory is preceded.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it should be done as we have previously stated.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	Say that you should sew the patient on a raised plank; and spread the suspensory ligaments of the testicles at the openings below; and hold the veins of the genitals with fingers near the base of the penis, which are proven to be in the buttocks; and have another servant extend them with great tension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And make an incision with a sharp pointed instrument across the vessels until they are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And remove all the peritoneum on both sides as you previously stated in the removal of the arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And insert into it a double-pointed needle and let one of them pierce the first part where the wound occurs, and let the other abscess in the second part.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And make an incision in the middle part through a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what has been accumulated from putrid and corrupted fluids.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And care for the wound with treatment of other wounds in which you want health to be produced by allowing the vessels that do not nourish one of the two testicles to fall, because it is not harmful for this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If a boy happens to be born with all his testicles, it is necessary that they are extracted or that the testicles are tied off so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the scarring of the vessels, and become atrophied, or that they cease to function in any way.
Capitol .lxv.	This appears to be a heading or title, likely for a specific section of the text. In medieval manuscripts, each section of a treatise was often numbered with Roman numerals (I, II, III, etc.) or Arabic numbers (1, 2, 3, etc.). Capitol is simply Latin for chapter. However, without more context, it's hard to say definitively what this heading refers to in the text.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	This appears to be a title for the treatise as a whole, translated from Latin to English as "On the cure of intestinal hernia." In medieval manuscripts, each treatise or text often had a main title (like this) and possibly smaller headings within the text itself (as we saw earlier with Capitol .lxv.). The language used in this title seems to indicate that it is written in Latin. However, without more context, it's hard to say definitively what this treatise is about or where it came from.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The onset of this hernia occurs due to a section that tears in the extended cephalic area above the abdomen, through which one of the intestines may protrude from the rupture.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture can be due to the cephalic area or an external cause, and this happens in both types for various reasons: blows, shocks, cries, or elevation from some serious cause, or similar circumstances.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this, when it is due to the cephalic area, is that it happens gradually over a long period and does not happen suddenly, and it presents as an abscess inside the abdomen because the cephalic area compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of this is when it is due to a section of the cephalic area, because at first it causes intense pain suddenly; and it presents as an abscess appearing somewhere other than the predicted site, which is definitely the intestine, and the body parts beyond the cephalic area.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine is forgotten without any covering, and this type of intestinal hernia is called "zirbal."
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is treated with ventosity (a method of reducing swelling by applying warm air or vapor), and sometimes the hernia opens, and it is held in place, which causes grave danger for the patient, and sometimes pain occurs when it is pressed upon.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in treating the types of this disease, there is fear, so it is necessary to avoid trapping in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The method of operation for that is to command the patient to reduce the intestine with their hand inside its cavity if possible, and place it over their back between your hands, and raise their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then sew the incision of the intestine at the edges, and sew the testicular incision entirely lengthwise; and then insert your fingers in two labia of the section as needed to cut the section with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is possible to be cut, let it be forgotten.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then remove the hernia sac that is under the testicles, until the white hard cephalic area is discovered on each side.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you insert your finger into the testicle where the white cephalic area is found, which is under the hernia sac, and between the cephalic area, and resolve any adhesion that is in the area behind the hernia.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then move the hand with the hernia sac of the testicles to the sides, and stretch out the white cephalic area with the left hand, and lift the hernia and the cephalic area to the section side; and command the assistant to extend the hernia and you resolve any adhesion that is behind it with complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And look for any signs that there may be no cause for the intestine to be enclosed in the white hard cephalic area.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for it, then you turn it out onto the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle that is thick and sharp, and insert it at the rear of the cephalic area, which is below the hernia sac, which cuts the section; and then sew the ends that emerge from the needle until they are four fields, and compress each one on some figure in the manner of a cross; and tie it tightly with two knots.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Approach the extremities of the feet and bind them tightly until any of the vessels that are swollen cannot transmit any cause, so that a cauterizing abscess does not occur here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	Wait another day, as the first binding has not yet taken effect; leave the cataplasm (a medicated poultice) that holds the testicles in place for the size of the finger, and apply it all around in a circular manner, leaving it behind.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Approach the incision made behind the cataplasm of the testicles and make an incision, from which blood and pus should flow as we have recommended in what has been said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and bind it; apply the bandage that we have recommended (and sometimes white lint is cauterized, which we mentioned to prevent bleeding from the incision, because this often occurs); leave the bandage in place until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the healing of the wound is delayed, then boil water and immerse a cloth in it, apply it to the wound until it falls off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Approach the wound with another cure for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Capital (chapter) LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On hernia (bulging of the abdominal wall).
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, there is no one who has been fixed with iron (surgery) to treat it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	Initially, they said that it should be treated as we have recommended in the hernia that is visible; which is to place vessels near the incision and make it easy to do so; and then dry up the abscess in the same area using something that helps with this, until the vessels come out.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Capital (chapter) LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the disruption that is caused in the entrails (intestines).
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the intestines as we have said, and in such cases, expose the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	Do not give the patient any cause for hernias in the genitalia (scrotum); and if they do occur, that is rare; and return it to its place at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time has been prolonged, a fissure is made in the cataplasm (medicated poultice) until the hernia returns to the cataplasm; this happens because of the extension of the cataplasm, which occurs in the intestines as we have said, causing the cataplasm to be stretched and softened and an abscess forms at that location.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The cure for this is with cauterization, as has been previously described.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Sometimes it is cured with iron (surgery) using this method: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then dry the location of the abscess formation with a dry cloth in a circular motion around it with an incision along the latitude according to the size of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Approach the white cataplasm that is below the cataplasm (medicated poultice) until it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Approach the iron (scalpel) and place it on the prominent part of the cataplasm (medicated poultice), and press it into the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Approach the two prominent points on the end of the thighbone (femur), and sew them together with one stitch connecting the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Extend the thigh, but do not expose the hip entirely nor let the wound extend or any other causes like you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Treat the wound with the care of sores, and when you incise the flesh, clean it and restore the wound within until it is solidified; because the hip is contracted and not adjusted for the protrusion.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	Cauterization is better in this place, as it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In some men, the scrotum of the testicles becomes softened due to the fact that the flesh between it is softened and its regulation (drainage) is affected.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one who treats it to have the patient lie down according to his side, and incise entirely the softened scrotum over the natural scrotum; then adjust two labia (lips) with a stitch.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, sew the excess of the softened scrotum with three to four stitches and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then incise between the stitches, and apply care for treating other sores until they are healed and the flesh is closed.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is prohibited, but because I remember it in this book, it is justified; and the remembrance of it is only necessary for two reasons: one for when it is knowledge of the doctor who is asked about it, who knows the treatment for the patient to which it applies; and the other reason is that on many occasions we may need castration of animals for our benefit, such as horses, cows, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by strangulation or by incision (surgery).
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the castration by strangulation, the method of operation is that we fasten the animal in warm water until its testicles soften and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take them with your hand inside until they are resolved (softened) and do not reappear outside.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by incision and surgery, you must hold the animal and press the scrotum of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then take hold of the suspension ligament (spermatic cord), and make an incision on each opening with one cut.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then make an incision on those parts that you will remove (the testicles).
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not damage any part of the hip, but only the small pelvis that is over the vessels (arteries).
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This method of castration by strangulation is better because strangulation allows less damage to the testicles, so that the animal will desire to mate less.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On Hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	In males, hermaphroditism occurs in two ways: one is when a space appears in the scrotum between the testicles, where female-like genitals are visible with both openings (vulva).
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And in some cases, the bladder (urinary tract) is located in the scrotum between the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in females, it is a special case: and it is that the vagina (vulva) on the pelvis is like two testicles of a male, but smaller at the opening, similar to the penis of a male and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three types: two for males and one type for females.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you must incise those fleshy parts adjusted until the infection escapes from there, and then treat them with care for other sores.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type of males with a bladder located in the scrotum, there is neither treatment nor operation on it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter LXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of softening and rotting due to causes of females.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Softening (lentige) and protrusion (leu) are caused by natural reasons when it is stretched out and becomes loose; and sometimes it becomes magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads like in men and enters the vagina.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, you must remove the excess softening with your hand or an instrument and scrape it out.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Do not over-incise, moreover in the area of the wound, to prevent bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And treat that (the affected area) with healing of the wounds until it heals.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Newly-born flesh is the flesh that grows inside the womb until it fills up that area (and soft protrusion appears around the edges, resembling piles; for this reason, I will call it "piles" in some cases). Therefore, we should incise it like we do with lentige and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of scabies.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Scabies in women should not be perforated or cut open.
E es o natural o accidental.	It can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is caused by disease that precedes it, and this can be caused by unhealed flesh or thin or thick scabs.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made or in the mother's belly, or in her ribs, or in the upper foot or in the lower foot, and forbid coughing and movement and entertainment, and strongly forbid menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The knowledge of this [condition] is obtained by examination of the mother, if the opening is apparent, proceed with parturition; but if it is not apparent, then you seek it with your fingers or with light.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the opening is due to subtle discharge and is near the two lips [labia], then you catch it and break that down.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And place your fingers on the two lips [labia], and then indicate with both hands towards the inside.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman should be on her back, with her legs spread apart, and then spread the two lips [labia] by force until that subtle discharge is broken and the opening is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take wool, dip it in oil and place it on the site, and apply heat with a hot iron to prevent the wound from becoming hardened.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the discharge is large and thick, then you should incise it with a spatula or a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the opening is due to a flesh wound, then you suspend it with a hook, and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And are those the medicines that stop blood flow without pain, such as opium and dragon's blood, and mastic resin, mixed with alum of vinegar.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a broad leaden cannula to prevent the wound from becoming hardened easily.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold that for several days and apply hot compresses.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And let it be cured with the other cure of hardening until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes during childbirth, other women's flesh also occurs, and then you must incise it according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if this is due to cancerous abscess in the mother, no iron should be used against it in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the cure of diarrhea and red swelling that occurs in the female's loins.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Diarrhea is recognized in the mouths of large veins until continuous blood flow from them subsides; and when diarrhea occurs, it is called chronic and is treated as follows.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	I have already explained in the division the species of these [affections] and the signs of these [affections], and I will say thus those that receive healing and those that do not receive healing.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	These [affections] are empyema and typhus when they appear in the mother's womb and do not manifest themselves through sensation, therefore healing by iron should not be attempted in these cases.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the mother's openings and for which there is sensation, those are the ones that are healed.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you must place the woman in a hot bath and bring out the afterbirth with forceps or sharp cloth, and cut these [affections] with scissors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And you must sprinkle powder from one of the incisive powders without bitterness on these [affections], as with alum and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then wrap her feet in cloth for an hour and place it in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of blood persists, then prepare this solution of sumac and coriander seeds and walnuts and similar [substances].
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take barley flour, mix it with honey and wine and make a plaster with water for the feet.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the blood is separated, it is good; and if not, make it stick with blisters, and on the breasts, with incisions.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and soak it in the juice of colandre or arnica or guarapo and white wine, and apply it to the area; and then cure the area with gargling until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if it is with sharp observation, you must cut this which appears from the area according to what I have said earlier.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Cure the area until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of an accidental hernia in the mother. This indicates the topic of the following chapter.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	The various species of abscesses that occur in the mother, such as scabies, ulcers, bladder stones, fistulae, and gangrene, and other abscesses. This is a description or classification of different types of medical issues related to the mother.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	I have already explained these diseases and their species and signs, and the cures for them in the division. This indicates that a previous section of the text has covered the subject matter discussed in this chapter.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	It is necessary that I tell in this treatise about the cautery for abscess that occurs in the mother when it belongs to those abscesses that discharge pus, and if you want to know how the operation of it is done with iron. This suggests that the following discussion will focus on a specific procedure or treatment for a certain type of abscess in pregnant women.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore, you must consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp with percussion and flexion and fever, and sometimes it swells and if there is sensation over that, then do not perform perforation on it, but cure it with water that helps in maturation until the acuity of the accident ceases. This indicates a specific set of conditions or guidelines for when to use a particular treatment method.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then you must make an incision in the woman on a razor that has two blades; she should lie on her back and adjust her feet to the edge of the bed, and her legs should be spread apart, and her arms should be placed under her armpits, each one with whatever is convenient. This suggests a specific positioning or preparation for the operation.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then follow the midwife straight ahead and provide her with the instruments necessary to treat the opening of the mother, the shape of which will come in those cases that require it. This suggests that the text is discussing a specific medical procedure related to childbirth or the mother's reproductive system.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, you must enter the mother's opening with it, and nothing from the instrument should enter the mother except the point of the instrument and the hand of the attendant. This indicates a specific guideline or precaution for the use of a medical tool during childbirth or a related procedure.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the mother's cavity, then you must place powders on the texture of the mother's cavity so that the entry of any instrument into the mother's cavity is prevented.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	If the instrument is too large to pass through, then you must apply a solution that softens the instrument and the attendant should hold the instrument and turn it until it has passed through the openings of the mother's cavity.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the membrane appears, it is touched and lifted and moistened, then you must cut off its head with a linen cloth.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	Once the pus is drained, you must place a heated iron rod or heated oil in the wound to stop the bleeding, and press a hot coal on the incision in the mother's cavity.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place before the mother and over the clean wool cloth soaked in a solution of bad herbs.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then let it be treated with an enema for about two days, which is necessary until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	The mother's cavity and wound should be washed daily until it is cleansed with water and honey, and with water in which crushed lily roots or long-stalked aster root has been boiled, and then returned to the enema.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the wound is deep inside the mother's cavity and swollen, then you must refrain from treating it with iron, having recourse to the remedy mentioned in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to treat ectopic pregnancies when they occur abnormally, as depicted in the figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife recognize at the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by the signs of it, and when you see the woman expel from her private parts and desires to smell the air, and above that place is lifted what comes out of her during delivery, and hastens the emergence of the ectopic pregnancy, then know that this birth is in a natural position, and the first one on its head, and the second one either attached or hanging or suspended from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see these signs, it is necessary to compress the abdomen of the woman so that the ectopic pregnancy comes out easily because if it emerges on its head, it will come out with the second one, and clean it of any superfluous matter with good cleaning.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But the one that is not in this position is unnatural and not suitable because if the ectopic pregnancy emerges on its feet and its body is emerging before its head and its feet, and its hand or foot is towards it, then it will need to be corrected by rotating it and moving it back into a natural position. Or it emerges with its head and hand or abdomen, and strongly turned on its neck, resembling the unsuitable figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skillful in all these matters and to avoid errors and disappointments.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And we are showing you the entire figure of these things, and what method is in each one for it to be significant and applicable.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the effusion is emerging on its head naturally and it is violent in the woman and difficult to deliver, and its vitality is already weakened, then use a cauterizing iron, or what women have, and evaporate the mucus of it with fenugreek oil and humid oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And the midwife enters between her fingers and cuts open the second one, or cuts it with her nails into the mucus inside it until it comes out what is in it of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen until the ectopic pregnancy is expelled.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not come out, then the woman should be administered mucilage of egg yolk and mucilage of fenugreek with scissors.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And order it to be carried out, administer the cleansing, that it be compressed and make it vomit with a gag; and open its mouth and nose with a spoon for an hour because it will soon forget it.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two more of the ectopic pregnancy are forgotten at the beginning, then you must reduce them little by little with gentle pressure.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not come out, then the woman should be placed on a stone and her feet lifted up, and the stone should be pressed down on her, while she is held so as not to fall backwards.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the masses are not turned back inside and the ectopic pregnancy dies, then you should make incisions in them and remove the rotten part of the ectopic pregnancy or pull out the corpse with cloths and remove it with equal pressure because it will soon be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the emergence of the ectopic pregnancy on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the ectopic pregnancy emerges on its feet, you must press them upwards, and turn the ectopic pregnancy small, and tie it, and seize one of its feet and stretch it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But if it is inside the thighs, you must order it to expel itself, and make it vomit with a gag because it will be forgotten if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten with what has been recommended, then you must return the ectopic pregnancy little by little to a position according to a natural figure because it will soon be forgotten with easy emergence.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden to use everything recommended, then take alum and dissolved rubber, grind them thoroughly in the mortar, and apply a line from this mixture to the woman's womb, at the bottom of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then place that which was ground in water until it becomes the hypochondriac region.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When the birth openings of her are relaxed, then perform subfumigation with myrtle and pause it over them.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	After the subfumigation has lasted for an hour, then make her vomit by inducing it and forcefully opening her mouth, remove what was produced, and gently press on the lower part of her abdomen near the birth openings with light compression, since this will quickly cause it to be expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The purpose of this procedure is on her thighs and her hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When this procedure is complete, then you should gradually insert your hands into her, little by little; and have the woman lean over her own neck, with her feet hanging down, and let them rest on a bed, and cover her hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then gently press on her abdomen little by little, and carefully extract what is between her feet from the vagina until it is ready to be removed through the lower birth opening.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the object is not expelled, then take her feet and move them forcefully, and press gently on what is over the hypochondriac region little by little until it can be felt near the birth openings above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then insert your hands and feel it gently little by little, and command the woman to push until it is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The purpose of this treatment is continuous throughout one hand.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Be careful in reducing her hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then raise the woman and make her walk around.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed and strike the joints of her body with forceful blows, and administer painkillers that I recommend for mucilage.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If the childbirth has occurred, then make her vomit on a dish, and study the reduction of her hand, and guide it naturally in accordance with its figure, and make her push until it is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The purpose of this treatment is to expand her hips and widen the opening at her mother's waist.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary for the midwife to have her hand on it and gently rotate it little by little, and facilitate its passage in this manner.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is swollen and has hardened, you should press on the affected area with what we have recommended of oil and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And gently press the affected area with the recommended pads, and when you have made it swell, you should press on it with a flat spoon and command him to lean towards the right side, and gently command him to compress it; then make it vomit with the appropriate condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus is prepared on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When there is an emergency delivery of the mother according to this method, consider, and you shall incise the second membrane with your nail as far as it can be drained of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the baby is hanging from the face and neck, you shall incise the umbilical cord, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then gently push the baby into the birth canal until the second [membrane] comes, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and the child will be delivered easily, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Delivery of twins or multiple babies.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins may be born after several contractions, and sometimes three or four, but this is rare and difficult to predict; yet it happens naturally, not by the will of man.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, even if they are many, as a second membrane, and separate them with forceps, distinguish each one by cutting the ligament at the umbilicus of each, and some contractions may be forgotten just like natural childbirth is easy, and some contractions may be overlooked just like an easy labor, according to what has been recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If they are difficult to deliver, you must attend the birth and proceed as we have said in discussing unnatural figures, then treat them accordingly as recommended.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the woman is subtle and skilled at making things easy and subtle, slow, and clever according to all figures as she is prepared by the midwife for health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recall that it is formed in the womb from embryos and aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some seasons consist of one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, or more days, and it is necessary to verify whether a woman has aborted within this period or not, and if she has given birth to more than ten fetuses, which was caused by the measurement of the wise sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this should be known in the science of the midwife, because it is necessary to know what strength and effort is required for that case, and therefore prepare accordingly.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 66.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On extracting the dead baby.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When treating a dead baby according to what has been said in the division of medicine and it is not far advanced, and you are satisfied with using force, then you must consider if the woman is of good health and not suffering from any of the accidents for which she is feared damage.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	The woman should be positioned on her left side with her head inclined downward and her hips raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The attendant should hold the body from both sides or tied to the left side, so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the baby.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And gently moisten the mouth of the mother with olive oil, aloe vera, and fennel seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And gently massage the midwife's hands with those oils and poultices, and gently enter her hand into the mother, and circle it around the baby to secure it.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	In appropriate places: consider if the baby is prepared to be extracted from its head, and then you should place your fingers in the heels of it, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or near the beard, or in the furcula, or in the areas near the ribs, or near the hipbones.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the extraction is to be from the feet, then do it in the instep or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	You should hold the finger with your right hand, and bend its curve in the area between the fingers of the left hand, and enter your hand easily with facilitation, and place the finger in one of the areas that have been mentioned, until it reaches the desired goal.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And place another finger or the third one if necessary, in the apposition of it to create attraction and not extension, following its straight line only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	It should be gentle throughout the birth, so that the extraction of it is alleviated just like when pulling a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it must be done between them (the patient) that the extension should be softened; and if any part of it is held back, then it must be necessary for the midwife to anoint certain fingers with oil and gently insert them skillfully into the area where it is held back, and turn the water that is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	And if the afterbirth is left behind, then the fingers should be pressed into the place where it is located until everything is expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is outside the other, and it cannot be reduced by compression, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and extract it as soon as possible, and incise it either at the joint of the hand or in the wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And likewise, it must also be done with the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large or it cannot be compressed, or if water is accumulated at its head, then insert the spinal spatula between the waters and split the head and drain the water, or dissect it with an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will resemble that of other instruments in the chapter that follows.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do the same if the fetus has a large head by nature: then you must incise it with a scalpel or grasp it with an allonge as described earlier, and extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is out and compressed, the furcula should be cut to drain the fluid in the feet.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if there are no complications or excessive swelling, then incise the head as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the placenta is detached or in the umbilical cord, it must be necessary to perforate it to drain the fluid that is within.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is above the pelvis, its withdrawal will be easy and the direction to the mother's mouth will be easy.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is compressed in the abdomen and pelvis, you must extract it with cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and make an incision in the abdomen and pelvis to drain the fluid in those areas.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are out and the head remains inside, the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is blocked, she should insert her hand into the vagina and search for the head, then pull it with the fingers towards the mother's mouth, and insert an inch or two fingers to help guide it.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is compressed due to an adhesion caused by the umbilical cord, do not force it; instead, you must administer oil-based emulsions.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Administer poultices and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the fetus is on its side, try to extract it by needle; and administer the fluids mentioned earlier to the living fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, incise the cervix and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	It must be ensured that no cause is left within the second birth (afterbirth).
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	Once you have completed your work, administer the fluids mentioned earlier for the treatment of adhesions that might occur in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If bleeding occurs, give styptic solutions and administer other treatments.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And he has seen a woman in the womb whose fetus was dead, and over that fire another observed with a fetus burning.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	A long time ago, the man had an adhesion in his navel; it swelled and became infected, and started to leak pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	He was called upon for its treatment and treated it for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then he applied strong adhesive plasters to it on several occasions, and extracted an object that resembled a bone, and after some days, he extracted another bone; and he was very surprised because there is no bone in the abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then he thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So he cleaned the wound and extracted many small bones from it, the woman who was in her mother's womb lived for a long time, but eventually died of a small arm wound.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	He did not consider this strange, but rather that it was science and useful assistance in the treatments that physicians administer with their hands for healing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Regarding the shapes of the instruments necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of the forceps used to open the mother:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of a scissors that are used to bind ligatures, with two blades at the ends of two handles.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this scissors should be thinner than a ligature, and made of metal or bone.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the thickness of each handle should be two fingers wide at the edges of both handles, and the length of each is one palm and a half; in the middle of the two handles are two adjustable rods that are already fixed, with a length of a little more than one palm and a few more, and a width of two fingers or slightly more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	These two additions should be inserted into the mother's mouth to open it up for those who are turning the two prescribed spindles.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Make another similar thing in a similar manner, but finer and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made from wood or ivory like forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of it (the instrument), there should be two additional parts similar to this, and the length of these additional parts is as long as a palm, and the width of each one is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with these (instruments), you should first place a woman on her left side, holding her feet downwards, and then open what is between her legs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then place your hand with the instrument in a similar manner as you would with forceps, according to the size that you estimate is necessary for the opening of the mother's mouth up until the point where the cervix is.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The shape of the lever which the ancients called...
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The shape of the levers that push things forward:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The shape of a clamp that holds the large head,
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the end, sometimes, and some of them are made long like forceps according to this shape, sometimes, at the end of which there are teeth like the teeth of a saw and it is cut and held.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The shape of a small clamp:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The shape of an awl having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The shape of an awl having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Shape of forceps with teeth for closing and holding the head of the thing:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The shape of a spatula having two ends, one of which is separated:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The shape of two wide spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are to be exercised, and when more are multiplied in their kinds and prepared, the craftsmen should make them as light as possible for their operation, and as many as possible according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should not neglect these instruments in any way, for their need is not to be excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Extraction of the second tooth/dentition
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second tooth is retained, you must command the patient to hold their breath, and then make them cough with condition, place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if this is not sufficient, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if this is not sufficient, you should then take a mouthful of water and perforate the covering (the membrane) with a hole, placing there a mixture of calamint, rosemary, anise, camomile, Arabic spices, cassia, and santaura.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water in the mouthful, and place it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Approach a cannula made of cane and insert it into the mother's mouth, keeping it there until the steam comes to the concavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Approach this vomiting as we have said, and the second one will be forgotten quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this treatment remains without effect, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in warm oil or micellage of aloe, and insert it into the vagina and seek out the afterbirth, and when found, take hold of it and gradually extend it out little by little. But if it is attached to the cervix of the mother, then you insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you find the afterbirth, extract it gradually according to the correct method so that the mother does not contract violently.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	It is necessary to press both the right and left costal areas with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	Approach it in the amount of pressure, for she will obey and release herself from attachment.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mother's mouth is closed, we have recommended a treatment using vomiting and a wave-like motion with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if all the causes we have recommended are not resolved, then be careful not to prolong the process of extraction, but if something has been expelled from her mouth to the female part, then cleanse it with a gargle and tetrapharmacon; for this will cause it to dissolve within a few days and be expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it is about to burst, it is raised to the head and stomach, and that affects the patient; therefore, it is necessary to administer sub-fumigations and appropriate remedies.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	When some of the ancients are mentioned, they were known for sub-fumigation with cumin and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument with which a woman is sub-fumigated should be designed for the prevention of menstruation and afterbirth.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It can be made of glass or clay.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	Place the thin end inside the vagina and the wide end over the fire, and the sub-fumigation should be held over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And let that be inside which is consumed that sub-fumigation and they repeat another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Treatment of an unperforated child's rectum. (Guessing from the context that "cul" means rectum, and "enfant" means child.)
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When children are newborn and their rectums are not perforated, they should be carefully examined and prepared.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore, the midwife should carefully perform the examination; otherwise, if not possible, perform it with a sharp spatula, ensuring that she does not harm the rectal lining.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place a piece of wool soaked in vinegar and oil over it, and clean it with warm water. (Guessing that "lana" means wool, "enfusa" means soaked, "vi e oli" means vinegar and oil, "enguent" means wash, and "entro" means water.)
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you are concerned about it being infected, place a cannula over it for several days and remove it when the child wants to defecate. (Guessing that "trauc" means hole, "canula" means cannula, "opilat" means infected, and "degerir" means to defecate.)
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	It often happens that the rectum becomes infected due to an abscess or hemorrhoid; therefore, the abscess or hemorrhoid should be incised, and it should be treated with the remedy and lead we mentioned earlier. (Guessing that "opilacio" means infection, "consolidacio" means abscess or hemorrhoid, "inscidida" means incision, and "aquo" refers to a previously mentioned remedy.)
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Treatment of fissures that have developed. (Guessing that "fistulas" are fissures or ulcers in the rectum, and "endeveno" means develop.)
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fissures that develop near the anus have thin and narrow discharge, while those that develop around the rectum or in the space between the buttocks are thicker and more pronounced. (Guessing that "las fistulas" refers to fissures or ulcers in the rectal area, "endeveno" means develop, "pus bassa" means thin discharge, "nodacio" means narrow, "grossetut" means thickness, "prop del cul" means around the rectum, and "en l’espazi de la una partida" means in the space between the buttocks.)
E es una fistula o motas.	Is it a fissure or an abscess? (Guessing that this is a question about whether the issue is a fissure or an abscess.)
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	If the narrowing is old and exudes thick, foul-smelling white or yellow pus, some of these fissures may penetrate. (Guessing that "aquela nodacio" refers to the narrowing of the fissure or abscess, "antiquada" means old, "corr" means exude, "humiditat aygosa blanca" means thick white pus, "poyridura subtil" means thin yellow pus, and "alcunas veguadas" means some of these fissures.)
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by the discharge that comes out of them and by their swelling; some patients may need an evacuation, and in many cases, worms come out of them. (Guessing that "aquelas penetrantz" refers to fissures or abscesses that have penetrated deeper into the tissue, "egressio" means discharge, "ventosetat" means swelling, and "malaute de egressio" means an evacuation is needed.)
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And in some cases, these fissures can extend into the bladder or the muscle of the scrotum; and they can penetrate through the joints of the hips and reach the kidney. (Guessing that "aquelas fistulas" refers to fissures or abscesses, "l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica" means extend into the bladder, "entro al meat de la vergua" means extend into the muscle of the scrotum, "penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta" means penetrate through the joints of the hips and reach the kidney.)
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	The way to determine if a fissure has penetrated into the rectum or not is to insert your finger into the rectum and try to feel for it, using a thin tool such as an earam (a probe) or iron. (Guessing that "aquo en que es conoguda" means the way to determine, "fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant" means if the fissure has penetrated into the rectum or not, "tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul" means insert your finger into the rectum, and "entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat" means try to feel for it using a thin probe or iron, but be careful not to hurt yourself.)
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If it is too dangerous to insert your finger, you can try feeling for the fissure with a thin probe or horsehair until you feel resistance in your rectum. (Guessing that "Mays si en aquela es turtuositat" means if it is too dangerous, "entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval" means use a thin probe or horsehair, and "entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit" means until you feel resistance in your rectum.)
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel the fissure at all or there is no cause for evacuation, worms, or swelling as we previously mentioned, then you should know that it is not penetrating, and you can proceed with treatment. (Guessing that "si no sentas aquela de tot" means if you do not feel the fissure at all, "ni procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat" means or there is no cause for evacuation, worms, or swelling, and "e lahoras coyta te a la curacio" means then you can proceed with treatment.)
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fissure penetrates into the bladder or the muscle of the scrotum, the nature of the problem is evidently the passing of urine and prohibition of that area with medication should be implemented. (Guessing that "la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua" means when the fissure penetrates into the bladder or the muscle of the scrotum, and "la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela" means the nature of the problem is evidently the passing of urine.)
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If the fissure penetrates through the joints of the hips or into the bone and causes pain in the surrounding area, then the sign is that it will pass through if there is no danger to the bone, causing pain in the surrounding area; and it usually produces pus quickly; and the treatment is not effective and not consolidated with washing. (Guessing that "la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os" means if the fissure will pass through if there is no danger to the bone, "envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida" means causing pain in the surrounding area of the hips, "que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps" means it usually produces pus quickly, and "ni es consolidada am enguent" means it is not consolidated with washing.)
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all cases of penetrating fissures, there is no cure, and the treatment is difficult and uncertain for the doctors who handle them. (Guessing that "E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant" means in all cases of penetrating fissures, "no es curacio de tot" means there is no cure, and "la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz" means the treatment is difficult and uncertain for the doctors who handle them.)
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing by iron is hoped for, according to what I will recommend to you, and what I have proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	The patient lies between your hands on their back and raises their chest towards them, the thighs are inclined towards the belly of the patient, and you attempt to enter through it with lead, or iron if it is in an abscess, until you know the place where you will find it.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the pain is around the neck, then you must enter your finger into the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you find a tender spot with your finger that penetrates when pressed, then you know that it is an abscess or flesh, and then you certainly know that it is penetrating; do not work on that, because healing is not in that, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some say that it heals in some men sometimes.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medicine in which healing is hoped for, it is that you ignite cautery thinly according to the size of the abscess, as previously said, and enter the fire into the abscess until it reaches around the neck; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the flesh around the abscessed area have been adjusted.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And heal that by wrapping it with lint until the flesh around it has withered, and heal that with medicines that cause and consolidate the flesh, and if it heals, it is good; and if not, do not heal it within a certain time by another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if a tender spot is within, and does not penetrate into the anus that is covered by flesh or abscess, and sometimes the abscess appears on what seems to be a bladder, and the abscess has soaked the skin around it, then dry the skin from the beginning of the abscess, and you will see the abscess dry up, and continue drying until the dryness reaches the place where the tip of the tender spot is, and through the tender spot is freed and catches.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Then clean those abscessed areas that resemble a bird's feather quill, and do not leave any cause for them to remain.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if there is bleeding that comes between you and your action when you lance those areas, then take the milk and a simple instrument is cauterizing with fire or sharp medicine, as cauterization with fire has good properties: it adjusts the healing of those abscessed areas, and the abscess drains due to the drying of the humors.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Then heal that by wrapping it with lint or gauze until the place festers, and then heal the ulcer with hard flesh-generating and consolidating medicines.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And those medicines in which there is drying and stopping; when it has been restored, it is healed and you do not fear relapse.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the abscess has already penetrated into the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then enter your finger into the anus and examine it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore, if the tender spot is covered by abscess or flesh, and it seems to be about to penetrate, then it is not an operation in that, but according to faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer it in one of three ways: or cauterize that as previously said; or cut it open until you can achieve the hollowing out so that it is possible for you to enter and heal properly; and do not press down on the abscess for fear of tearing the rectum, and accidentally injure the patient in that way without their consent; and then heal it with what was previously said, which will work easily; or lengthen the covering and clean the pus that is cut open near the anus, as previously said, or with a sharp instrument at its tip, and then clean the abscessed areas that are in the incision with percrustation; and then force yourself to restore the entire ulcer with incision, and if the opening of the pus does not consolidate, and the abscess remains open in the anus division, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the abscess is closed in this way: when you insert your finger into the abscess and it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with skin, then take a sharp instrument for perforating, which is like a hollow needle for preparing the bowels as follows:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into the abscess that is wrapped in five fields or around those areas; and then insert a sharp needle into the abscess until you achieve the hollowing out.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates into the margin of the anus from inside, then you remove the thread that has passed through as you insert your finger into the anus; and extract the tip of the thread and adjust both ends, strengthen each one, and leave it for a day or two until the thread sinks in more deeply when the surrounding flesh has sunk in around the two ends of the thread and they are closed.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then treat the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the ulcers of the fistula are not penetrating, then make them penetrate, in whatever way you prepare, as long as it is not causing pain, because it is not your job to do anything that causes injury; and return it to its place when it has healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the pointed spatula used to incise the fistula: the curve is sharp on one side and flat on the other, so as not to injure anything that is not necessary, such as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Stitching hemorrhoids where blood flows upon their incision.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids can be of two types: either like charcoal that is located near the anus or like grease from boiling.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And small and large hemorrhoids that blood flows from them all the time and is one type, and are multiple, and outside the anus, and at the ends of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are outside the anus are in months of little humidity, from which a clear water or a small amount of blood with continuous flow, and they are of the same color as the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment of the one that is inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit down and wait for the anus to dry up and the hemorrhoids to appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you should cut them with scissors or whatever you have at hand, and return the cuts to their original position.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	However, if the scissors are not present in them due to their humidity and softening, then take those with rough cloth or cotton or woolen swab, and pull them out with your fingers, and incise them and sprinkle some caudal powders near the incision, so that they are like cauterization; or cauterize them as prescribed in the section on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Then treat those with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obstruct the outlet, then pierce the patient with a catheter through which there is a small opening, and wash it with water that comes from the anus and gently encourages the evacuation of the patient when he squeezes.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	However, if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, the cause is light, and you take them with your nails or scissors and incise them, and treat them as I said before until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for the incised one, it is necessary to administer suturing of them in this way: take fine gauze and insert it into a needle and extract the hemorrhoids on the top part, and make the needle penetrate the wound of the other side, and wrap the two ends of the gauze on the side deeper than the needle, and transversely; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong stitches, and knot the gauze and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leaving one unstitched and not sewing it, so that the excess blood can flow from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the anus and wait for it to dry, and cover that over the anus and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And leave that inside until it is contained; and when it is healed, treat those with enemas or the other treatment until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On fistula treatment.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Multiple watched over by the excision of a wound or by constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are ancient and not very effective in medicine, it is necessary that you cauterize them with the point of the spatula or your nail until they become wet and the discharge above them is stopped, which prevents consolidation; then treat them until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you remove them with great caution before they start to bleed and are ulcerated, and treat them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of fistulas, it is essential.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that alamir (a form of fistula) is essential, and it is not redon (round) as the head of a nail, and it is found throughout the body but more in the lower parts of the legs and arms, and it should be treated by those pains.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And so it is necessary to incise the area around the nail, and keep it with scissors or scissors, and remove it from its place, and treat it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize those as described in the section on cauterizing.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	However, a wart is a small rough round fistula on the surface of the body, and multiple watched over by many children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment is to stretch it out and incise it, or tighten it with gauze or thread until it is contained.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize that, as I said before, with fire or sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they have been removed inverted and non-inverted with the instrument that I will describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Mays formica is a small, pimple-like or fistula-sized elevation on the surface of the body that moves like an ant, and when it is touched, it becomes inflamed like an ant bite, and it appears around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment for it is to take a sharp needle or a lancet, and press it into the ant-like elevation, holding it with the circle of the canula from its edges; then turn your hand with the canula inside until you penetrate what is in the circle of the ant-like elevation, and press it on the skin, and excavate the ant-like elevation from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do it with an earthenware needle or an iron one, following this method:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Make the incision above the needle thin and dull (meaning not penetrating through) and wrap it, so that when you apply pressure on the spot, the pus inside is expressed and the rotation of it is facilitated.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize (or burn) the ant-like elevation as described in the cauterization of atheyl under the "cauterization" section of the chapter on cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Regarding the instruments that are administered for making an incision.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes, an incision is made with a silver or copper needle, or melted lead or hammered; and sometimes it is made with small or large instruments depending on those administered, because the one used in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose backs are thin or painful, the incisions should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small incisions:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the canula (needle) above where the pouch is tied should be wide, following this method: and it should have a distinct location where the pouch is tied in the same way as sometimes occurs.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the pus below, which is inserted into the rectum, should be dull (meaning not perforated) but not leon (unclear what this term means), finely pointed; and on one side there are two cuts, and on the other side one cut, and the size of the cut should correspond to the thickness of the rays and large pus, with a small cut for thin or small pus.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the pouch in which the animal urine or sheep's wool medicine is placed should be a span (approximately 9 inches) long.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated by many cuts, as it is rotated; and if the space between the cuts is thicker than the finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And it should be introduced into those cuts faithfully and deeply with a sharp instrument, or cover them; and place the pouch over it; and when the pouch is placed inside, it should be tight at the head of the needle between two distinct locations with strong pressure, and cauterize each cut: However, the quality of cauterizing with this method is that you fill the pouch with the medicine, which should be heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and make sure it is not too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And place the patient on their back, and raise their legs and place a cushion under them (or a blanket); and then anoint the edge of the cautery with oil or albumen of egg or mucilage of fennel or similar; and introduce it gently into the rectum with ease, and the assistant should take the pouch and press it firmly and repeatedly with force until everything that is in the incision is expelled from the intestine; and then remove the incision and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine is lacking in that place, it should be increased; and if it remains there for an entire night, it is more harmful in treatment.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If the disease of the belly and its symptom is treated with cauterization, then do so repeatedly until it heals.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If there is an emorroid or abscess in the buttock, then use a subtle cautery and lion-like cautery among those that are called cauterizers.
De curacio de las plaguas.	On the treatment of sores.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of the treatment of sores what is appropriate for the free person, and now I will say the treatment of those with money according to what is suitable.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that sores are differentiated according to what causes them and according to the place on which they occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes that many times are made by blows, incisions with a knife or sword, or strikes with a spear, staff, arrow, or similar, are such as these.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But sores that occur in the parts of the body are such as those that fall on the head, neck, feet, abdomen, or throat and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the treatment of some sores based on this reasoning and rule for other sores.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I begin with simple sores of the head, since the composition will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when a simple sore occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, consider: if it was caused by blows or similar, and the patient has already tightened the bandage but it is a large wound and you fear that the wound will develop an abscess, then cut and drain the cephalic vein immediately, and do not delay; extract blood according to the strength of the vein, unless there is any reason prohibiting phlebotomy, especially if the blood that has emerged from the sore is scant.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And perform phlebotomy on the opposite side of the affected area, and keep the patient from filling up, vomiting, and eating heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is any reason for fasting, then reduce the food and avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	Wait on the sore if an abscess forms, place oil of roses or wine in which is steeped near it.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are certain that an abscess has formed, then wait on the sore, if it is recent and the air has not changed the powder which I recommend applying in small amounts.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, then wait for a clean wash to heal.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the sore is large or due to incision and similar things, and the edges are not properly closed, then close them with suture as I recommend for their closure.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the sore has exposed bone and cartilage, but is not retained by anything more than a small suspension, then make an incision on it and treat the wound with medicines and restore the skin over the area of the bandage, and order the patient to eat foods rich in protein such as beef and pork until it heals.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if there is gangrene in the bandage that does not adhere to the bone, then make an incision all around and cut it, and treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these sores there is an artery or vein from which blood may flow and it has not been cut by medicines, then ask about the artery, and if you find one that has not been cut, make an incision with a spatula or lance; and if necessity requires it, cauterize it until the blood is drained.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these sores are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; therefore, sprinkle that powder over it, since it solidifies before the air changes on it.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is this: take an equal amount of oil from crushed pine kernels, dragon's blood, and unburned charcoal; grind it all up and sieve it, then fill the sore with it, bind it tightly until it adheres to the skin, and allow it to coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And apply a strong poultice on top of it and leave it on, but do not remove it until the sore is not an abscess, since the medicine will not be absorbed into it until it heals.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes do this alone with caution when pine kernels and dragon's blood are not available.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And perform this method of treatment on large sores when it must be waited upon and tightened, and only on fresh sores whose air has not been altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air has been altered, especially in the summertime, then do not use this position for the powder, but instead treat them with what was said earlier, until you wash them with clean waters or wait for the oatmeal paste to dry; and treat them with other treatments until they heal.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If a fracture occurs in bone, which is small, then you extract it with this method.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	Here begins the cure for skull fractures that are poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the pains in the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the pain occurs in the neck, it is not different in treatment, and it is similar to a simple skull fracture.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, if it is the nerves, it should not be treated in haste but with what causes strong coagulation, such as ziniar and zegi, which is vitriol, because they harm the nerves and counteract them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not put any pressure on the pain, because the substance of nerves is fragile and its continuity is with the brain, which is above all other members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is cured with light medicines such as washing with sweet water, sometimes immersed in rose oil or not, and thus when washed with sweet water and other remedies according to this method, and then gargling with water.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the pain is large, then administer suture or sew the lips of it, and apply care to it with powders until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the pain has depth or occurs in the lower part of the jaw where there is pustule, then you perforate it in the most depressed place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If an artery is cut in the pain and there is bleeding, you separate it, dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessity dictates.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the vertebrae of the neck are cut or all, and the veins of the neck are saved, you adjust the lips of the spine with suture on the neck of the cervix, do not touch it; lift it up evenly and reduce it to its natural shape, tighten it with a proper structure, and let it rest for several days; apply care to it with gargles containing coagulation and stimulation until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the pain has already entered the bone with danger, you percuss it, and if there are fragments of bones, remove all those that can be, and what cannot be removed, let it rest until the pain subsides, and it should be separated and the pain relieved.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the pain is recent, sprinkle powder over it that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If a fistula is made in the pain, treat it with what will come to your mind in its chapter (i.e., section).
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the pains in the neck or similar ones that are made between the shoulders and are made with a club, sword, spear, or similar objects.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If the blow is with a lance or sword, and sometimes of deep penetration, you must consider more if the pain has wind when the patient complains about it; know that the pain is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is not deep penetration and the pain is recent with the patient's blood, you must wait in the first hour to sprinkle powder on it, and do not tighten it because the blood is retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart, causing the patient discomfort; instead, apply warm gargles and release it every two days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the gargle is not available, you must wait in the orifice of the pain until it drains what comes from humidity; make the patient sleep on the pain so that it runs out what is adjusted there.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If three days or more have passed since the pain, and no spasm, palpitations of the heart, fainting, or constriction of the breath occurs in the patient, and sometimes other good conditions exist, know that the pain is saved; then treat it with warmth and other care until it heals.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing is excused and it has been open for a long time, know that a fistula has already occurred; treat it according to its chapter (i.e., section).
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the pain is caused by a blow with a club or sword, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, treat it with what comes before suturing if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If danger has already occurred in the bone, and if it has already been cut out pieces, you must twist the pain and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, you must let them rest until the pain subsides, because the extraction of them is relieved.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidents that occur in the other members, the aid in treatment is the same as what has been said (i.e., similar to what was mentioned earlier).
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the pains in the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that occurs in the abdomen is either large, small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the large one, sometimes there is the intestine or nerve of the intestine, which causes penetration and the suture of them to be very violent and very delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small rupture is difficult to repair by another method, and it is known that its reduction is more difficult unless you take care not to introduce them into their place immediately, for it swells and becomes thickened, making the introduction of them difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, a small rupture is preferable, for in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two cases mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You should know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two of these methods are common and are used in sutures of other diseases of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Two other specific methods communicate with other diseases, but they are more specific to the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend that you should have exposure and declaration (consent) from every patient.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, when the disease is small and there is some cause of the intestine by it, and it is difficult to reduce that, then it can be in one of two ways: either due to the small size of the rupture as we have said, or because the intestine has swollen inflammation due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore, when this is the case, it is necessary that you warm it so that you immerse a sponge or damp cloth in hot water alone, or take it in hot water squinants (cupped hands), and cyperum, and spices, and bind it with that to the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it happens that this has stiffness and water alone is better for the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	Therefore, when the inflammation is resolved, then you moisturize the intestine with water containing alum and malva, for by this it is relieved from obstruction with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the obstruction is expelled from this treatment, then you make a small incision on the rupture with an instrument for which you insert emetics (emorydas).
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The primary treatment is better when it is appropriate that there is no section, and there is no need to cut off immediately and without necessity or delay.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, see its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The first part of it is rounded and pointed, the other part not pointed, and its tip should be subtle, but not as thin as a spatula's tip, rather blunt to some extent.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	Therefore, when the disease expands and the intestine comes out, its reduction should be according to its natural form in its proper place, if it is possible over that, for this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the rupture is wide and in the lower part of the abdomen, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs as far apart as their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place their head and chest as far apart as possible.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Similarly, if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your attention and consideration always on this so that the side where the disease is should be more distant than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And in this way, it is necessary to administer this in large diseases and in small diseases.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In small diseases, pause what you have prepared and ensure that the administrator is among your most trusted, who will hold the rupture with his whole hand and adjust the lips of it, and approach exposing that area to the one where some cause for suture is appropriate.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suturing method: one that you take the needle (or a needle according to the size of the disease); and approach it from the edge of the rupture of the said anular finger, tighten the needle one time, but do not insert the point in both ends of the knot, with two ends of the cipher that are outside the knot of the partitions inside, until you make it penetrate through that part; and you have already added two ends of the knot and two ends of the cipher, and they have been made four rows.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And tighten it with double thread around the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and add the lips and wound by proper addition; and approach the thickness of the finger and insert another needle in that place, and approach it as was done with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the entire contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The needles should be neither too thick nor too thin, for the fine needles pierce the flesh too easily; and the thick ones are difficult to insert in the knot, and therefore it is necessary that they be of medium thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	It is not necessary that the needle be inserted into two ends of the same knot, so that the flesh is not pierced lightly and the wound heals before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not prolong sutures so that the wound is prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And approach the ends of the needles so that they do not injure the patient while sleeping; and pause over the suture, which are expanded pulps from all parts, which have the ends of the needles; and leave it in until you know that the wound has already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These small types of stitches using needles are appropriate for small wounds, as one needle or a few are used in their stitching.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second type of stitch is common: it is that you administer the four corners, from one end and two ends of the wound, in a single go, with a needle covered in a fine and thick thread.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	Then, when the needle penetrates these four corners, withdraw the needle from that parting point it started from, so that the thread pulled out along with the pus separating area is returned to the wound, so that the stitch is like a stitch of fabric and the fabrics are strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Pause between each stitch the amount of thread on the smallest finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	The wound that occurred in a man's stomach, which was pierced by a sword, and it was the major rupture of a hernia around two palms from the hernia of the same place and was the disruption at the middle of the member; and then I reduced it after the hernia had been open for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The wound healed in the space of 15 days or less, and it was cured and recovered; and he lived for many years, and his condition improved.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	The other doctors had judged that it would not heal; and by miracle, for I did not cure it with juice, because it was in a location where no juice or any medicine was found, but I covered the wound with old cloth two times a day and washed it assiduously with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will explain two types of stitches according to the words of the Gospel.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And begin with a suture of the edge, and enter the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	Then, when the needle pierces the edge and enters the flesh according to correct method and length of the entire body, leave the end of the wound where you inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the wound from the inside part to the outside part at the other end of the thigh.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And so when you have made it penetrate once more in the same location of the thigh from the inside part to the outside part; and leave the end of the wound where it is at this time, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the wound from the inside part to the outside part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	Make it penetrate with your penetration that you made in the thigh at the end of the mirror, which is within the opening, so that all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then start the stitch from this side and continue it at the end of the thigh on the other side, and remove the needle from the edge that penetrated, and return it to the same edge and close the end of the thigh with this side of the mirror; and remove it from the edge that is from there.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Do this once and then another, and do it again close to the previous one until you sew everything that is outside according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The total of this method of stitching is that you sew with the stitch of skins like you sew fur, except that you sew the thigh once from the end of the edge, and that you leave the other side until it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second type of stitch that I call Gaula is one of speech and it is recommended for this purpose, it is sewn as half-stitches by which doctors sew wounds, except that they attach all edges to their corresponding edge according to nature; and they apply the end of one side and the end of the mirror to the other end of the wound, and this is done in the manner that I have recommended.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	It is necessary that you place the needle at your discretion in the end of the mirror opposite to the edge outside, and make it penetrate only into the inside part there; and leave two ends of the thigh; and then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two ends of the thigh.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And turn each one of them, and make each one penetrate from the inside part to the outside part at two ends of the mirror on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of stitching is better than the common light stitch, and it is the type of stitch that has been remembered before.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gaulia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	But others say that the abdomen stitch is corrected with two needles, so it is that you insert one needle into each of them and begin with the introduction of the needle that you should do, and make it penetrate to the other side according to the stitch of those who sew the hearts.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, the stitching of it is more difficult than at other places of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of healing for wounds is also a judgment for other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is because when you achieve the wound before the air alters it, and reduce the intestine and close it properly, then pause on that carnivorous powder. (Note: "encarnativa" means "carnivorous", not related to flesh or "carnal".)
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause on that alum paste which is presently brought to you before it hardens and heals the wound, and make it consolidate and watch; and apply care for it as the cure of other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you are not present for the medicine, then pause on it immediately, because it begins to rot, fester, and change color every two days, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not need another medication in most cases when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound will spread to the main members, then it is necessary that you immerse wool in boiled oil of good quality, or in rose oil, and apply it in the area between the joints and leave it for a while.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in your intestines, because it often happens that this occurs, then you must cauterize it with black beech-wood vinegar and especially if the pus has reached the intestine and is being expelled into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the large intestine heals more easily than the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "jejunum" does not receive healing from a wound that occurs in it entirely; and this is due to the great number of veins that are in it, and the large size of it, and the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if the issue that comes from the wound is tissue and you manage to achieve it recently, then reduce it according to your rule as you would with the intestines.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed to a place and turned green or black, then you should tighten it with a suture on the area that is darkened by it, because blood flow will come out, as there are veins and arteries in the tissue.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And apply a ligature to it that is other than the one used for suturing and pause the two ends of the thread hanging from the wound's edge, so that you may relieve its attraction, because you will cut off the tissue and drain the blood from the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembering wounds when they occur in the intestines.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a small rupture in the intestine, it is possible for it to be restored in some people, because I have seen one who was stabbed in his abdomen with a lance and had a wound on the right side of his stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula, and he expired from lack of treatment and wind.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore, I continued the treatment of him even though it was not cured, but refined it until the wound healed and the area was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I waited until the area was consolidated, and observed over the patient who had suffered an accident in his abdomen; and no one died from this accident and remained in their usual habits of eating and drinking, and went into baths and exercise.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people say that when a small wound occurs in the intestines, then it is necessary to tie it in this way: and you take large loaves; and adjust the lips of the wound and pause one of them with the mouth open over both lips of the wound; thus, when you pull on it and tighten its mouth, detach the head of it, as it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And pause another loaf near the first one, and do not stop making them one after the other according to the size of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And reduce it and sew the wound; and leave those heads attached in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine can be tied with a thin thread made from the animal's intestine, since it is smaller in needle; and you take the end of these threads of intestine, and make it almost detached, and tie the end of it with thread wrapped around it, and insert the thread into needles and sew it to the intestine, and reduce it at the rupture.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing with loaves is not only by trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, then it is not enough to tie it, but rather refinement, and healing from it entirely is not possible.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound or boil that becomes rotten and old, and turns into an ulcer and is not consolidated and oozes pus all the time and does not burst, then, in any member, it is universally called a fistula and we call it an abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	Fistula, in truth, is a hard, white, painless nodule with a concavity similar to the concavity of a bird's beak, and it is therefore named alcaus rizatus, which means "beak."
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	It is in some men a moist nodule that oozes pus; and after several hours, the moisture is drained off in some places.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Sometimes this moisture moves about, becomes thin and thick at the same time, and is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	I have already mentioned the division, so when I speak of ulcers, know that any ulcer that is not healed or naked flesh is not one of them except for one of these causes: the first being a scarcity of blood in the body; or due to malignancy from the part itself; or because there is hard skin between it and the lips, preventing new flesh growth; or because it is a moving ulcer; or because the ulcer within contains pus and the matter that is sent to it is of poor quality; or because the treatment is unsuitable for healing it; or when corruption catches in the region and it becomes pestilence; or due to the property of the region, such as in Saragossa, where digestion of diseases is difficult, and healing of abscesses by nature is slow; or because there is a bone, worms, or multiple bones in it.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have shown all these causes, their signs, and the treatment of them with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	Therefore, it is necessary for you to know the healing of fistula, which is done by surgical means with a knife.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	You should know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body, as some fistulas reach the veins and arteries, nerves, spinal cord, intestine, bladder, ribs, vertebrae of the back, or various joints composed like the hand and foot; and these are the ones that give proximity to the main part and similar places.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Therefore, one of these fistulas, treated in this way, is one of those difficult diseases to heal, and it does not receive treatment; and dealing with it is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If one of these fistulas has a depth that does not reach the places mentioned above, and you hope and believe in its healing, and wish to gain knowledge about it, then take a probe or iron, and if the fistula follows the correct course, pierce it with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a probe of lead, because lead, due to its lightness, is alleviated and curved following the twists.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has many horrible holes, it is not possible for you to mark over it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, close the holes by their own holes, because the moisture that you use to close one hole must go through the other holes and come out of them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then approach with great care, according to the method that is possible for you to determine if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the fistula is long or short, deep, or a fistula with many holes on it that covers everything with its size, with your strength, your vigilance, the position of the patient, and the discovery of pain, you should compress the area with your hand, and similar signs and causes of abscesses apply to it.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you are in a position of certainty regarding all these causes, then go to the healing with confidence: it is that you consider whether the fistula is superficial and near a joint or nerve, artery, vein, one of the places I have told you about, or deep.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	You should dry out the fistula as was mentioned before about its nature, and remove what is in that filtration and rotten flesh, and what is born in the sores of the skin, or ulcers, and cure it within until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is deep and follows the correct course, then it is necessary to incise it in the front as far as possible for you, clean out all its rotten flesh; and apply warm poultices wrapped in medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have captured with a probe.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that for several days until the hot medicine completely destroys all the rotten matter in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore it with suppurating ointments that create healthy flesh within until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it as recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of fistula is bone and it must be confirmed by you, then investigate it and dry it out as recommended, provided that you do not prevent any cause of vein or nerve or main part as mentioned before.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is discovered and there is corruption and blackness in it, then scoop it out until all the corruption is stopped; and treat it with what softens it until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it oozes pus as before, then you should know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then investigate it again carefully and reason about it and clean it up with your last strength, and restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it heals, it is good; and if not, you should know that the corruption is in the deep part of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore it is not treated but rather allowed to be.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the corruption of the bone is small, or it can be pulled out, then you should pull it out with subtle forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If there are many bones, you should carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any cause for it in your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If any cause of moisture opposes, and there is no fear or error in its incision, then incise the ligament or flesh where it is, and separate the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, then pause on the wound that may heal the wound, and leave it within the area of the surrounding flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and keep the incision you made in your operation constricted.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Moreover, if you fear, pause on the wound that is submerged in boiled oil, or a wound submerged in strong Egyptian ointment, or one of the various warm ointments, because when they become soft, the ligaments separate from the bones and the abscess is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	Moreover, if it is a large bone such as the hip bone or pelvic bone or similar ones, and the part that has been corrupted is only the face of it, then cut off the affected area with resin only up to where the blackness and corruption remains inside, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	Moreover, if the corruption is a large part and the corruption has already reached the medulla of the bone, then it is necessary to close it and cut it completely inside the area where the corruption was reached, and then care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you what might be appropriate for a man in his loins, that you pause on it and assist in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Take a young man around the age of 30 who has pain in his loins, and from within the parts there is bad matter that extends to the material inside the body to reach the loins, and it is an abscess with a large abscess, and it was not caused externally.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	Therefore, the time was extended for the abscess due to the error of the doctors until the abscess had healed, and then, from that matter, a large number of motes appeared, and its healing was delayed until the hernia became fistulated, and all kinds of pus and humors came out.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And after two years, many doctors were treating him, not in wisdom but in skill, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the hernia and the matter that flowed out of those fistulas with a great abscess; and the body of that man was completely stabilized, and his complexion was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a probe into one of the fistulas and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And I immediately searched for all the fistulas and found that they were connected to all the parts of the hernia.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I took and cut into one of the fistulas, and found a bone piece, which was already rotten, earthy, and decayed; and it had already been corrupted in part of the hernia that had penetrated into the membrane.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I cut out the piece of bone that was exposed and prepared for me.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I dug out what was not bone but the corruption that had been excised and cut off, and I had already drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I paused the healing of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, but it was not healed.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And I re-explored and found bone again in the second exploration, but I continued to find corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I removed what appeared of that corruption, and then I was determined to make the healing and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I examined again and did not cease to explore the bone little by little in detail, and made the healing and restoration of it, but it was not restored until I explored around a palm's width, and that extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicine, and it healed slightly and was cured.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there was no need for further exploration and incision of the operation and section of it, only by the disposal of the weakness of it and the lack of its tolerance and fear of death, because in all hours it happened due to excessive sweating and bad fainting.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus it is healed by complete healing, and nothing remains in the place of hard bones; and good positioning is made for it within its body and the virtue is returned to it; and it is maintained in its positions and no harm or inconvenience is done to it in walking or any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	However, if the bone is protruding in the body and already fractured, then it is necessary that you cut it as follows: take a sharp instrument and hold it at the end of the protruding bone, command someone to extend it; place a thick linen bandage over the skin surrounding the bone, draw the skin apart from the bone, revealing the skin over the area where you want to suture, so that the skin does not get injured during suturing.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Stop a piece of wood or a table beside the bone appropriately, because when you do this it is not forbidden to use a knife that does not cut corrupt flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	It is necessary that the suturing be done on the small corrupt area little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the corrupt bone and does not appear in its appearance to the senses, and possibly the other side may need stitching as well.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is corrupt and not protruding, then there is a continuous division between the two parts, and the corruption is in one or both parts of it; then you should cut open all the skin completely; place a piece of wood beside it, and stitch the first part where the corruption extends as far as the stitching continues in the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the stitching be done according to the location of the corruption, as I have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the corruption is at a joint, cut the corrupt joint and stitch the bone where it is continuous with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable but rather a trick (or deceit).
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the chest or foot, it is difficult; however, you must investigate the corruption in whatever way it appears to you and cut it open and clean it according to each situation that is possible for you, and with every trick be corrected such that it does not harm veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know which saws and needles are suitable for cutting these bones, according to the position of the bones, their preparation, the size, the subtlety and the thickness or thinness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore it is necessary that you prepare all types of surgical instruments appropriate for each operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that this operation signifies for you the type of instrument that is needed; when you have great study, experience and knowledge of the techniques of this art, and have observed various methods of illnesses, then you already have what is suitable for each illness with regard to the instruments.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I remind you, at the end of this chapter, the number of instruments that you will need, and those that you will use as simple ones for the procedures that you will perform according to your discretion, which you will experiment on the others.
Forma de serra:	Type of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Type of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Type of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Type of large saw:
Forma de ray:	Shape of a rod / staff
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this rod be in the shape of a cross-headed nail and its points like those of a thistle (or star).
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It is not necessary except when the joints are inflamed or wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of larger scissors than others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of smaller scissors (or forceps):
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of long scissors (or forceps):
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another saw suitable for cutting bone:
Forma de lu:	Shape of the (cautery) iron:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of scissors with a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of thin scissors (or forceps):
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of scissors with curved tips (or forceps):
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of small scissors resembling tweezers (or forceps):
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of teeth that can cut through bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of small incision scissors (or forceps):
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another pair of incision scissors (or forceps); this one resembles a rod and the tip is shaped like a saw, and it is used in multiple locations when cutting bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of rod suitable for drilling through bones (or bone bit):
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the tip is triangular and sharp-edged (or pointed).
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and it is covered like all the causes we have mentioned regarding scissors, forceps, and saws (in other words, it is coated or treated similarly to these tools).
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For incising bone edges (or cutting through bone) and securing bones together with sutures (or stitches).
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	When a limb is damaged due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause (such as disease or injury), and the damage does not respond to treatment with medicine, or if the damage persists without any apparent cause, you must amputate that member through it to avoid further infection or worsening of the condition. The patient will escape death or prolonged suffering due to the loss of the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of this condition is that the limb becomes black before it can be cauterized (or burned), or it putrefies quickly into the member and spreads throughout the body, causing the entire body to rot and die. Therefore, take care to amputate the affected area as soon as possible.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if the cause of the corruption is poison from sources such as sea scorpions, viper venom, or various other dangerous animals, the same procedure applies (in other words, amputation may be necessary to save the patient's life).
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the corruption or injury is in the fingertip, you must amputate the tip of the finger and do not allow space for the corruption to spread into your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	If you reach the arm (or shoulder), you must amputate at the joint of the elbow and do not allow space for the corruption to spread into the upper arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If the patient's condition worsens, you should make an incision on the arm at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If the disease spreads to the joint of the arm, then for the patient it is death; and administering another remedy in treatment is like giving quantity without virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	As with the foot when disease spreads to the joint of the foot, you should then make an incision into one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If swelling appears on the foot, you should make an incision on the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if there is inflammation within the nail, you should make an incision into the finger joint at its base.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If the disease has spread over the nail, it is not treatment but dismissal; and you should allow the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of incising a member or sewing it is that you tighten the ligament at the part where you want to incise, and tighten another ligament on the location; extend one ligament at the parts where you have incised, and extend the other ligament on top; separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments using a spatula or blade so that all the flesh is exposed; and then either incise or sew.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	It is necessary to place cloth on all the parts so that it does not touch the raw area, and bring the wound dressed and covered with a cauterized dressing to the patient.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if there is bleeding when working, you should cauterize the area immediately, or place some powder on it to stop the bleeding; and return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And bind the affected member with suitable ligament, and heal it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I recommend that you apply this remedy to a man in his foot, which I also recommend, as it occurs when there is blackening in the foot due to a blister resembling burning by fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	That disease first appears in the affected part and then spreads over the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man, prepared for himself, places on the affected member as much as is necessary to cure it and goes to the limb with the intensity of the pain and burning sensation from it, and incises the foot at its joint, and heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time that remedy causes that destructive disease in the indicated hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And therefore it comes to me, and I, performing this remedy, perceive the excess in the hand of medicines, and the superfluity does not spread, but rather begins in the other affected area when it begins in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to incise the hand of that patient, but I did not want to do it, fearing the spread of the superfluity, and instead feared the incision of the patient's hand was death, as the virtue of the disease was in doubt.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he lost hope in me, he returned to his country and I was informed that the man prepared himself and incised his entire hand, and healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have not added to this story except as an aid to understanding this disease, and as a signification by which it may be understood and acted upon.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the cure of sinews and the quality of clysers with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until drainage of pus occurs, and it is broken and perforated, and the pus is drained out, leaving a void like a vessel, and a fine linen cloth is placed over it as a dressing, and no further corruption occurs, and it does not press on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and not a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged until corruption enters any member, it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The cure is to incise that cloth all around as it is rolled up, and especially when it is fine and made like fabric, and ensure that it does not adhere to the location due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the cloth adheres and that the corruption has not been achieved by further consequences, and there is putrefaction in the cloth, you should treat it with a clyster.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	You should consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the odor is foul-smelling, you should treat it with an Egyptian clyster made of oil and wine and garlic in parts, which are placed in a vessel, and then heated over the fire until the medicine becomes fragrant and purified.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And you should take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and treat the sinus with the clyster, and tighten the orifices of it, and leave the medicine in it for the duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And you should remove that with care; and do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the smell has subsided.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is clysterized with water of ashes when this medicine is not present; and you should take the ashes of figs, put them in water, and then boil that until you are convinced that the sinus has subsided.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or water from ashes, then cleansing should be done with a mixture of water and honey infused with zinc oxide, and cleaning should be done with a mixture of vinegar and honey, because honey has the property of purifying and washing, and vinegar makes adhesion stronger, especially where there is an excess of stiffness and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you find that the sinus has been relaxed for some time and you are comforted, then perform cleaning with water that causes flesh to rise up.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	It is taken that you take digestive drugs and dissolve it with rose oil and stiffening vinegar, or that you cleanse it with certain medications and other enemas that have the properties already written in the treatise on enemas.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	When the orifice of the sinus is narrow and the cannula of the enema cannot be inserted, you should gradually widen it with a small iron tool, pausing where necessary and wrapping it in Egyptian or Basilican oil until it is wide enough.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the orifice is wide, you should attach the lips of it with stitches and leave a certain amount in which no further addition of enema is made.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of which the arm extends above the joints is moist, you should dry it in the area where the arm can run into the joint below, because when the arm is constricted by the sinus, flesh is generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus in the area of the bone as desired, you must prepare the limb by preparing it with the appropriate preparation so that the arm can move easily according to your plan and there is no obstacle in the way of the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidating medications that are placed on the sinus according to what you want to extend them over fabric.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the fabric should be of such size that it covers the entire sinus; and near the right side of the sinus' orifice, make an incision with scissors that is slightly larger than the orifice of the sinus; and extend over another piece of fabric from the lion enema according to the length of the incision, and place it over that for a position distant from the sinus' orifice to relieve the swelling of the arm and not let the fabric be too large, but rather apply some days once a day.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	The one that is on the orifice of the sinus, which you keep moist at all times so that it drains whatever is in the area of the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And to know if what comes from the arm is liquid or little, or digested, or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And at this point, you consider the location of the sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and whether there is an abscess there.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in this way, and you see that the matter exuded on the orifice of the sinus has already adhered, or shows signs of adhesion, you should remove it or after three days, and when you remove the dressing, you change the fabric and renew the enema.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the sinus has large spaces and there is subtle virus, do not despair of adhesion, because healing approaches, because some people have slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and from those comes the opposite.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinus has not healed for several days and the arm remains undigested, you should know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, you should dry out the medications, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and properties, they will become dry like Egyptian enema, where there is an excess of addition of zinc oxide.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last one that is cured is that you take Egyptian enema and dissolve it in rose oil, mix it with ancient wine in its substance, apply it to the wound, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And do the same in that action when there is no arm, using Egyptian enema, honey until it thickens, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and grind everything to a powder and sprinkle it over the honey until it is heated, and apply it with linen on fabric and strengthen it on the sinus; and sprinkle that with the honey until it thickens, and grind it into powder and sprinkle it on fabric and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes administer it with long aristology and reason of celestial lily (and this is celestial lily) and flour of iris and centaur, and use these simple or compound remedies, grind them and sift them and pulverize over the honey that has been recommended; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, you should know that corruption is in the joint of it, and you should then perform exploration of the bones or other hard members or ligaments; you should then treat it with fistula cure, as described above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of treatment for paronychia (infection around the nail) and abraded/trimmed nails, addition of incisions to the finger and surgical cuts.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	The translation of the given sentence is: "Regarding treatment for paronychia (infection around the nail) and abraded/trimmed nails, if it lasts a long time and its cure is valuable or it becomes an abscess, or it becomes corrupted and penetrates into the nail bed that rots the root of the nail, and it corrupts entirely, and it spreads its corruption to the bone which produces a foul odor, and the tip of the finger is affected, and the color of it becomes dark."
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Therefore, when you have the above-mentioned condition and it does not respond to your treatment, then it is necessary that you incise with an iron all the overgrown excess of the nail and cauterize the wound near it, because cauterization is beneficial in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and you wish to remove the excess of the nail which presses on the surrounding flesh, and it begins to hurt and inflame it thereafter, then it is necessary that you place a thin tool beneath the angle of the nail that penetrates the flesh, and push it upwards and incise the affected flesh with ease, and place a curettage tool on what remains of the affected flesh filled with corrosive medicines until it is completely removed; and treat the affected area with ointments until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has entered the bone, then it is necessary that you incise the bone and remove it, because there is no cure when the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corruption and decay spread to the finger, you incise it in one of the joints according to the affected area, and apply a cure until it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail becomes percussive or abraded and causes intense pain, you should initially anesthetize the patient, and then cut the nail with a sharp instrument in a transverse section from top to bottom, taking care not to cut into the skin beneath the nail, because you will cause the patient intense pain, and this may lead to the growth of excess skin in the affected area; and treat the affected area with whatever reduces pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, if it is congenital (meaning it was born with this condition), which occurs in some men, it is all flesh and bone, or it is in the bone or the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And those who are born with such a condition have their roots in the joint, or it is congenital in some of the aforementioned cases.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But if it is congenital in some of the fingers, it is not harmful, but if it is born in joints, it is harmful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are born with flesh-like growths, the incision is easy, and it is necessary that you remove the root with a long blade.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But of those who are born in the joint roots, the cure is difficult; therefore, avoid abscessing it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But when it occurs in fingers, you should first incise the flesh of it with a round cut to the bone, and then use a suitable saw, and apply a cure until it heals.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Consolidation that occurs in the aforementioned places due to observed motes or congenital conditions of the human who is born with such, or due to consolidation of a wound or burn, or something similar; therefore, it is necessary to remove the consolidation until the aforementioned areas return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place a layer of fine lead between the infected layers and saturate them with red oil to prevent consolidation easily; separate the layers, or insert a thin sheet of lead between them until it is consolidated as required.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly, if consolidation occurs in some of the places with the palm, you should remove the consolidation as prepared and appropriate for the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Incisions are various (meaning they can be many different things).
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varices (meaning swollen and filled with melancholic waste veins) are various, and they become knotted large veins full of superfluous matter in the members of the body, and the major event occurs in the legs, especially in those who are traveling, working, or carrying heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, you should administer purge of the body with black bile several times with strong force, and apply bloodletting to the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But the treatment of such with iron is according to two methods: one is that it should be incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein should be raised and the entire thing extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision method is as follows: first, encircle the leg with hot water until the black blood (feculent matter from the vein) is resolved, and then firmly bind the patient's leg at the most elevated part of the thigh to the lower hip area with a bandage, and cut the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide incision, and raise the black blood with the strong hand above the leg from below to above until the desired amount is drained, which will remove the power of the illness.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Approach her and command her to abstain from foods causing black bile generation.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this is noticed by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation is done in this way: you who are examining the patient's thigh, if there is swelling, bring warm water and immerse the thigh up to the knee with hot water until it swells and veins appear; or exercise can be performed if warm water is not available, until the member is scalded.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Approach the area directly above the vein for incision along its length or near its end, or at the base of the vein you should cut the artery.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Approach the area with a sharp knife and excise the vein in its entirety until it can be felt, and recognize that it is blackening when it descends into darkness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	Therefore, when you see the area where it is white, you will find a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Approach it and place the lance into it until it is raised and withdrawn from the incision, then hold it with a hook or a lion's tooth.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Approach another incision next to the first one, cutting through three times, and excise the vein above the vessel where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Approach it and raise the part to make an incision in the rear section where the artery is, then extract it and elevate it until it emerges through the second incision, and extract it from the incision that is over it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Continue this process until you extract it from the incision that is above the other incisions or all of them, and then make an incision there.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If it does not oblige you to extract and elevate, insert a thick double-edged needle or hold the lance in place with your hand and rotate it all around until it is withdrawn.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Be careful not to make an incision as it may be difficult to raise the part if it is broken, and this could cause harm to the patient.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When the entire part has been withdrawn, pause over the wound that is covered in wool soaked in vinegar and both red and white oil, and treat it until it heals.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the vein is contracted due to a twist with which it is enclosed around the parts, and not according to what has been said, then you must cut through it on all sides of the twist and at the points of enclosure, and suspend it with a hook until you elevate it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Be careful to make the incision without cutting the vein or harming it, as it will be difficult to raise it; and use your prudence in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision where the cut vein is:
Forma de unci orp:	The shape of a hook:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not appropriate to use hooks or objects with a sharp tip because it could harm the vein; and it should be of thick flexibility, as if it were too thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; having excessive thickness, as has been said, is unnecessary.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the thighs in warm lands, such as those of the East (Arabia) and India's dry and barren territories with little vegetation or rainfall.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And weak veins are generated in other parts of the body, other than the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The cause of this is putrefaction that comes from the wound, as venom inside the body snakes and worms such as scorpions and parasites generate between the skin and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The sign of the susceptibility of this event is swelling in the thigh, and the area becomes inflamed; and the vein begins to emerge from the site of that inflammation, resembling a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity appears, it is necessary that you cover it with a piece of lead weighing approximately two drachms. Insert it and leave it suspended on the thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	For as many days as there is any cause on the parts outside, wrap it with lead.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If the part does not heal, make an incision and cover the remaining part; do not make another incision until it emerges entirely from outside, as if you make another incision, it becomes contracted and enters the flesh, causing abscesses, pus, ulceration, and bad wounds.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it must be treated gently and removed little by little until it is completely expelled from the body without any cause remaining in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	From this vein, blood has come out in some men whose length is about five palms and it has been reported to me that one of twenty palms has issued forth.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, insert the probe into the wound and penetrate deep into the body with a long probe until everything contained in the matter has been evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and apply care to that area as for the cure of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein often gives rise to sores, and moreover when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, many offensive discharges come out from it, and blood is issued forth from each discharge.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Therefore, treat this as I have said in the division and with what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From a section on worms generated beneath the skin and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called bovine disease in some places because it often occurs in cattle and is a worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and it goes up and down throughout the body and is manifested by sensation in one member after another until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms and snakes and tapeworms and roundworms in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared due to its malice because when it moves through the body and rises to the head, it reaches the brain, at which point it immediately vomits bile into it and destroys the brain, and this causes many diseases.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure it and remove the worm, it should not be done unless its movements and appearances at sensation are known, and then it is necessary to strengthen what is above it and what is below it with force and pressure, and apply heat to it and remove the worm.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If it is fastened in the flesh and not absorbed, then you pause with a heated cautery over the area until it dies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the place, which corrupts the area as I have said above.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you find the creature approaching the head near the brain, then apply strong pressure and tight binding to the forehead, and apply heat to it and remove the creature; and the patient must use purification of the body with medicines that evacuate impure humors and avoid foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From a section on disease of the nose.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called nafir in our land, and it is pain that occurs in some members and it is transmitted from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen that which I recommended.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	A physician was summoned to a sick woman at a village, he uncovered her arm and found a small inflammation on the basilic vein of the arm, and since it had been cut for an hour, I saw that inflammation swell as if worms were crawling towards it, but less noticeably than it should be, like if it was live silver moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain of that spot spread into the muscle and remained there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And place your other hand on the opposite chest to reach the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And I recommend that you turn your entire body around as I saw, and it was very marvelous of the change and the rapid movement of one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this method in the most hidden places, but I have also seen many that suffer pain when the movement of limbs is changed.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it in women as much as I did in men.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was because the woman was old, as her body and veins were exposed, and in this case, the sensation of windiness appeared due to the movement change.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this reverse cure does not appear in those who are delicate and have soft bodies with weakened veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And as you want the cure of it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not use heat on that place as we said, but rather apply strength to it gently and cold on it inside until the windiness is released, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it in your hidden places, then cure it with the help of an emetic and something that expels windiness, and sing a song with pills made of opium poppy and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of extracting the sweat glands (sweat ducts).
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sweat glands (sweat ducts) are diverse depending on the species and location in the body where they are found, because their variety is that some have large points, small, concave, soft, solid; and of those with three angles, and those with tongues; and those with teeth.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the one that is according to the limbs and the affected parts where they are found is according to two methods: because the limbs or main organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, hernia, bladder, and their similar ones; and therefore when you find it in any of these major organs and it appears to you as a sign of death, I recommend that you avoid extracting the sweat gland (sweat duct) from those who are in the most critical condition, and when this evil symptom does not appear to you, and the sweat gland is not hidden deep inside the organ, then you should remove it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of the liver are when you find a sweat gland and pierce the bone, and it is released from the cavity which is above the brain, as it happens violently with severe headache, blindness, dizziness, fever in the hidden parts, inflammation and fever of the tongue, convulsions and confusion of mind, vomiting of bile, speech becomes weak and destroyed, and the voice is lost, and there is released from the wound place white moisture like powder, and eyes like watery flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Therefore, if these symptoms appear to you, then you should avoid the cure and the removal of the sweat gland, unless it is absolutely necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the arrow strikes the heart, being near the left breast, and it is found embedded in a hard cause and not a vein; and its movement resembles the movement of the pulse, and black pus flows from the wound, and that heat of the extremities, shivering, and fainting occur; then know that death approaches swiftly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung and produces sputum of blood from the wound, and the neck vessels are compressed, and the patient's color changes, and exhales a great sigh, and asks for cool air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the padding on the foot and pain occurs near the small ribs, and it produces a great and violent pain and heavy sigh, but the rest of the limbs are not affected by the muscle.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then there will be much vomiting of undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow strikes the abdomen and becomes embedded, then there will be a tear in the wound, or cloth, or intestine that is torn apart, and there is no hope for recovery from extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow strikes the bladder and is excreted outside through urine, and some cause is processed outside of it, then know that it is fatal for the patient.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But other members such as the face, neck, throat, jaw, shoulders, and their similar parts, such as the spine, furcula, hip, pelvis, and limbs are saved according to the greater dispositions if the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not poisonous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I advise you that I have seen this type of arrow, so it is a sign for your cure.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in a man an arrow struck the lacrimal duct of the nose at its root, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving behind the hair of the eyebrow, and he was healed, and no harm came to his nostril.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who it struck in the hair of his eyelid, leaving behind the eyelash, and the arrow was already embedded and could not be removed except for a small tip that adhered to its shaft, and it was a sharp arrow of Turkish arrows with a lion head without eyebrows.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The Jew was saved, and no harm came to his eyelid.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian who it struck in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, with eyebrows; and then I incised it between two grooves, and it was already submerged in the throat of the man; and then I sharpened it with that, and carefully extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who it struck in the stomach, and thought he would die by that; but after passing thirty days without any change in his condition due to his dispositions, I incised it and pushed on it, and he was healed, and no harm came to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow struck his back, and the wound was healed over it; and after about seven years, the arrow was expelled from the groin.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow struck her stomach, and the wound healed within it, and there was no change in her condition in three months, and the woman suffered no harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow struck his face, and the wound healed and the arrow was removed, but there was no great pain, but similar symptoms occurred.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king who it struck in the middle of his nose and had already declined slightly to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to treat him after the arrow wound for three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I probed the wound of the arrow with a sharp instrument, and did not feel it; but he felt a prick to the right eyebrow, and so I hoped that the prick was from the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I plugged the hole with a styptic and digestive ointment, hoping that the hole would close so that it appears to me the location of the arrow, so that it can be cut off.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And it does not happen in the place where an accident occurred that the lance has reached that place; and you continue with the plaster over it for many days, and no other accident occurs; and the wound heals gradually, and the patient recovers from the extraction within several days until one day they feel the lance in their nose and recognize this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then apply sharp and corrosive medication to the wound for many days until pus emerges, and with the probe you try to find the tip, and extract the subtle point which is sticking to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then you adjust the opening of the wound with that sharp and corrosive medication until the tip of the lance becomes visible to me, and pass time for four months with this while waiting for my response.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Then let the pus drain from the wound and make it larger so that I can insert forceps into it, and leave them there without moving, then you do not stop sharpening and designing on that with various means of engineering until one day with methods of engineering you grasp it with forceps skillfully made, according to the form that will come at the end of the chapter, until you extract it; and then restore the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I will restore it, and the wound heals, and the patient recovers completely by entire health, and suffers in no way due to this.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain lances, regarding which you should follow my rule and significance on what I have not said, because the divisions of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehensible by narrative nor do they comprehend these books.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled craftsman compares much with little; and with what is presented he understands what is absent, and recognizes new operations and new instruments that are necessary for the descent of foreign causes of this art when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so I say that lances are not forgotten in the members in which they are inserted except in two ways: either by attraction of the place where it entered, or by the opposite side of the other division.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And the one that is inserted by the place where it entered, or is a lance proceeding from a fleshy place and shot out and forgotten.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not remove it immediately at the time of capture, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh around it can become necrotic and its attraction and escape are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is inserted into bone and you do not remove it immediately, then you must leave it for some days and move it with attraction and touch every day, and it will be forgotten.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not remove it immediately, then you must perforate around the lance in all parts of that bone with a very sharp tool until the space is expanded by the lance, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the lance is inserted in the bone of the head and has already passed through one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the patient with some of the symptoms that I have said, then you must refrain from extracting the lance and leave it until his being is balanced for several days; because if the lance reaches the cephalic cavity, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the lance is not inserted but only in the bone of the chest and does not pass into the cephalic cavity, and the patient remains for some days without any symptoms of those accidents, then you should engage in the attraction of the lance and the attraction of that place.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is not deep and does not require removal, then you administer various treatments around the lance as recommended, and take care of that place until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the lance is hidden in the chest and cannot be felt, then you examine it with a probe, and if you feel it, then you shoot it out with various instruments suitable for its attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the probe, and here there is no bone, nerve or vein, then you make an incision on the wound until it is expanded and possible to extract the lance.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are auricles present where it is located, then you remove the flesh around it in all directions with all the tools you can; and engage in this, if you cannot reach it through the exit of the flesh in fracture of the auricles and twisting of those until it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the lance in any place where it is, then you use twisting of your hand with forceps on all sides until it obeys; and sharpen it with subtle skill that the lance is not broken and that it is made difficult to attract it and extract it.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot remove it immediately, then you leave it for some days until the parts that are around it can be prepared, and you move it, which is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if it causes countercurrent flow of blood, then you administer what I have said for treatment in his chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Care for the incision of vein or nerve, or tendon, and provide means in every way possible to prevent the escape of pus; do so with ease, tranquility, slowness, and firmness as I and you recommend.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Furthermore, compress the pus to ensure that the patient is in a figure similar to the one in which the pustule should be, because it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that's not possible for you, administer what's possible according to the figures (or shapes).
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the pustules that are on the opposite side of another part, or those that have proceeded from another part to the outer parts, or the edges of the pustule turn green due to feeling pain in the area above the public bone and sometimes it becomes prominent; then you incise over it; and make the incision according to the amount that forceps take; and tie it up, as it is made easily removable.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the knife opposite to where the pustule enters the bone, and expand it as much as possible, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If that's not the case, leave it for several days and then return it into what comes out (or drainage).
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the pus is in the cavity of the pustule, then you push it out (or drain it).
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the pus is pressed and you want to administer drainage, then enter and press it with a concave instrument in order that the concavity of the instrument enters the cavity of the pustule and then push it out (or drain it).
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the pustule is concave, then you push it out (or drain it) with a strong instrument entering into it, as the pustule is relieved by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the pustule is constricted (or contracted), then you must expand all the flesh in which it is located, if that's possible for you, and take care of it with what is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the pustule is in the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the chest, and is close to where you can touch it with your hand, and it's possible to incise over it, then you should incise over it and be careful not to make an incision of a vein or nerve, extract it, and sew up the wound if necessary, and take care of it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The shape of the forceps used for extracting pustules:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the ends of them (the forceps) be like an eagle's beak, shaped as a saw, when they take hold of the pustule to prevent it from slipping out.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those (the forceps), there are made small, large, few and medium-sized motes, according to the size of the pustule and its depth, and the width of the wound, and the degree of constriction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The shape of the concave pressing instrument at this concave end is like an eagle's quill to relieve the entrance of the pustule and push out the hard one.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of the hard pressing instrument:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like a rod to relieve the entrance into the concave pustule and press it with that (the instrument).
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of phlebotomy of veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy, it is customary to perform phlebotomy on the following thirty (30). of which it is in the head, 16 [parts] these are the two pulsating veins, which are close to the ears, called the temporal arteries; there are also two herbs that appear on the temples; and there are two veins that are in the tear ducts of the two eyes, called excretory veins; there is a vein prepared at the midpoint of the forehead, and another vein at the tip of the nose; there are two guiding veins at the neck; there are two veins under the upper lip; there are two veins under the lower lip; these are the veins that are called angular; and there are also two veins below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	the veins that are lanced in the arms are 5 [veins]. One of those is the cephalic vein, and it is the latissimus dorsi muscle; the common people call it "the vein of the head," and it is a large vein, composed of one branch from the basilic, and another branch from the cephalic; it is commonly called "the vein of the entire body," the basilic is stopped at the latissimus dorsi muscle, and is known as "subclavian," and the common people call it "vein of the abdomen"; the brachial artery, which is in the elbow joint, and is the one that is punctured, and it is the one that appears above the point clearly; the cephalic vein is also present, located between the large auricle and the small finger.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and ankle there are three veins: one of them is behind the bend of the elbow, the second is the saphenous, whose location is below the ankle joint of the leg; and the sciatic vein, whose location is below the bend of the elbow on the other side; in the ankle there are also other veins similar to these.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The junction of the veins that are near the ears is associated with ancient and migraine-related catarrhs, scrofula, and old ulcers on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The quality of bleeding that you recommend in this case is as follows: shave the patient's head, wash the patient's head at the occipital region where both veins are wide and well-rubbed; firmly hold the patient's neck with a bandage so that their ears appear at two pressed locations on the head; and ask for that area with your words, and if you feel those areas with your fingers, here is where to try.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the sharp knife and use it to make an incision at the location where the vein is hidden within the coccyx, until the blood flows out towards the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then lift your hand with the vein and coccyx to the joints above and make an incision into the vein, cutting deeply.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be approximately two fingers' width or thereabouts; drain the blood as much as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then press on the pulp and hold it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And the incision and subsequent cauterization of these veins and the coccyx has been explained at the beginning of this treatise.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But the two arterial veins that are in the temples benefit from bloodletting are old, harmful, and frequent ailments such as migraines and chronic eye problems caused by fluid accumulation in the head.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	The quality of bloodletting these veins is as follows: hold the patient's head motionless until both veins appear to your perception and are clearly felt with your fingers; then ask for them by name, and if you feel those areas with your fingers, here is where to try.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then lift the coccyx over the vein at the joints above, as you have indicated with your words, and make an incision into the vein below, lifting the vein up; cut it in the same way you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then release the patient's restraint and place your hand on the vein for an hour, pressing firmly over that area; hold it in place with strong pressure until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And the recalling of these veins and their incision, as well as their attraction, has been explained at the beginning of this treatise.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore, bloodletting of the forehead vein is similar to bloodletting of the sagittal vein for old facial diseases such as migraines, chronic pain, and putrid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of bloodletting there is as follows: hold the patient's head motionless with a bandage until the vein appears; then take the instrument that is called a lancet, which has this shape:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Press the pointed end of the lancet that is at the tip of the instrument onto the vein and puncture it with a slight angle or by some other means in its manner, allowing the blood to flow as much as you wish; then release the perforation of the patient and hold it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes the vein is opened with a lancet, but it is not necessary for the lancet to have an acute tip like other lancets; rather, the tip should be wide and the bloodletting done transversely, because the bone is close and strong and could easily break if the lancet is thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the benefit of the two veins that are in the tear ducts of both eyes for scabies of the eyelids due to pain and inflammation in the eyelids, and facial diseases, is not as great as for other parts of the body.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient holds their head motionless with a bandage and you make the incision there; you stand above the patient's head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And make the bloodletting incision transversely, but narrow and shallow because there is little flesh in that area; if the incision is thin, it can easily be broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Allow the blood to flow as much as you need, press firmly over that area for a new day, and release it afterwards.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But bloodletting of the nasal vein is suitable for acute fever and violent vomiting, as well as facial diseases, chronic pain, and migraines that occur in the face, especially when they are old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of bloodletting there is that the patient holds their head motionless and you hold their nose with your left hand, taking a thin, long lancet and placing it in the middle of the bridge of the nose where the vein cannot be felt, because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	You must finish the bloodletting slowly with the thin lancet and allow the blood to flow as much as you need, holding it for a night because it recovers quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the benefit of bloodletting in these two veins is for the treatment of alopecia, the onset of leprosy, various diseases such as epilepsy and palsy, and inflammatory and corrosive ulcers like herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of bloodletting those veins is that the patient holds both in their neck tightly; the craftsman stands above the patient's head, and the patient lies on a bed.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Approach the vein along its length with a wide and shallow phlebotomy, then extract blood according to a moderate quantity or as needed; make it similar to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then untie the bandage and straighten out both veins with a moderate constriction to prevent the patient from being suffocated; leave them in for the morning until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The aid of the phlebotomy on the veins is also to apply small abscesses and pustules from the mouth and corruption of the gums, as well as bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the phlebotomy is that it should stop the pain of the patient before you, tighten his neck with a bandage, and then gently pull back his lips and observe both veins, one of which is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and it is more so because there are many small black veins around those veins; and then make an incision in each with a cut.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if there is doubt, and you do not know which one it is, then make an incision in the larger of the two, and from the pus manifested by that one.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	Make the same appearance on both veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is more customary to make an incision in the two veins that are on the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But the aid of those two veins below the tongue is also to perform phlebotomy on the cephalic in cases of suffocation that are in the throat, mouth illness, and mouth sores.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of phlebotomy on those is that the patient should lie between your hands and the sole, raise his tongue from him, look below his tongue, between one side of the vein and the other side, and the color of each is gradually darkening.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform phlebotomy on each one; and be careful not to press too hard in phlebotomizing those, because they are arteries below.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are phlebotomized in the neck are those on which it is customary for all men, and phlebotomy of them is done according to two methods, or apply mirtil berries or olive oil with decreasing subtlety; or bleed with a phlebotomy knife, calling it alnessil, and this is its method:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this alnessil is that it should be a cutting and of those specific sharp and subtle lengths according to the width of the veins, and according to the constriction of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of mirtil phlebotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	sometimes the sides of it may be like that, and it is necessary to open the concave veins full of visible blood that contain thick clotted blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the method of olive oil phlebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This phlebotomy is smaller and has finer ends, and it is necessary for the phlebotomy of thin veins that contain fine clotted citrus juice.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The assistance of the phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts blood from the sick areas that are the gallbladder and neck, and from what swells the feet and stomach.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	It is necessary for the phlebotomist, when performing the procedure, to be careful as it contains an artery and if he makes a mistake or accidentally punctures an artery while doing the phlebotomy, it will cut the artery and cause bleeding, thus it is not advisable to perform a phlebotomy on that without first making an incision with a lancet.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilic vein is not clearly visible, it is necessary that you search for one of its branches or find another vein; or perform phlebotomy in the end of the arm as it is clearly visible, and cut it with a lancet as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	However, if you wish to perform a phlebotomy in the cubital fossa, it is necessary before the narrow part of the arm to find the location between the wrist and touch the place, then place your hand over it with a cloth; place the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision using a lancet as we have said; and be careful not to hit the percussion in the area of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you feel tension in the ligament, inflation appears at the place where you have placed the cloth, then that inflation is the inflation of an artery, and therefore it subsides.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see blood flowing in the phlebotomy like urine of a child and the blood is thin and red, then know that it is arterial blood; and then you must hold your hand over it for a long time and apply pressure on it; and then remove your hand, if the blood continues to flow, since it has been cut, you should tighten the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Keep the patient dry from moisture, be careful of him and do not allow him to get wet for several days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	However, if the blood does not stop flowing and there is no medicine available for it, you should cut the artery if it appears to you; as the extremity becomes constricted, the blood stops flowing; or you can use a ligature, tie it and tighten it over the location of the vein with narrowness around the wrist and pulses towards the other side.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	If the blood stops flowing, that is good; and if not, you should treat it with what was described earlier for the location of the powders to stop the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The stopping of the blood flow in that area is difficult due to the small size of the wound and the tightness of the ligament of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	However, phlebotomy of the dark vein is beneficial as it extracts blood from the subclavian part of the head and the part below the chest, since it consists of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	It is necessary for the phlebotomist to be careful in the procedure of that area as it contains a nerve; and if he makes a mistake and touches the nerve during the puncture of the vein, it will cause paralysis, and healing will be difficult, and severe damage may not heal completely. This nerve is often felt; and if it is hidden in some people and is subtle and not visible, then you should stop the phlebotomy with the incision made with a lancet, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, you should make an incision along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it extracts blood from the head and relieves headaches.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this way, if you want to perform a phlebotomy with an olive or a myrtle lancet; for it is safe for all veins, since it does not contain an artery or a nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is also necessary to perform the phlebotomy that you do not puncture the tip of the lancet too much, and look for a lighter location, and not notice if it is not touched by the first percussion in the phlebotomy area after some observations.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, severe damage may occur in some people if not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but if not noticed in the second observation.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of that phlebotomy and its complications are numerous, in which it is necessary to consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is only administered for the preservation of health and hope of recovery and precaution against diseases, and that it should be performed on one of the veins located in the elbow: cephalic, dark, or basilic; and it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in the morning and autumn, and in winter near meals when signs of congestion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And it should be performed on the third day or the first day after three hours have passed since eating.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	More flebotomy, which is administered, more it provides convenience and necessity or not at night or during the day, in any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	It is necessary that the child not be bled before he is fourteen years old, and the pregnant woman should not be bled except during the fourth month to the seventh, and the elderly women should not be bled who have passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And whoever wishes to be bled by some method, it is necessary to clean the intestines before the bleeding with a lion's clyster, if there is any fissure retained in them, so that the superfluidities do not enter into the veins during the bleeding of the intestines, which are pure, and that they do not harm the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	Nor should the sick with nausea or vomiting, nor those suffering from disease or drunkenness be bled until this has passed, nor a patient with dropsy, and bleeding by flebotomy is feared near to colic passion and vomiting, and near the abdominal pain, and near the multiplication of the genital organs and labor, and exercise of fasting or vigils, and all causes that dissolve virtue, either corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And it is necessary to consider the humors in the subtlety of food and drink, and medications if this is possible for them.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter into the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise through some exercise to make the blood subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	Pause the bleeding from the feet during the day, as it is around the third hour, as we said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And protect the feet of that person on that day from all animal and mental misfortunes, such as angst, anger, fear, and from all bodily troubles, such as labor, excessive pain, and genitals and similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in his purse, prepare to be present with the causes in the use of which the custom of men is accustomed with aromatics and fragrances, and balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Follow the blood-letter on a cushion that is placed under the one who should be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And draw out the arm, and wash it with his hand, the blood-letter, twice or thrice; and tighten the linen bandage around it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And the tying should be tempered, for the tying which is not tightened or the tying is with superfluidity, then you prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is with softening, and then you prohibit the core of the blood.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And in the tying, it is necessary that the one who should be bled washes his hands between them until the veins are inflamed and declared to the touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And the blood-letter anoints his fingers with a little of the old oil properly; and the person's left hand indicates the vein, away from the place where the bleeding is to be made, so that the vein flows slightly, and the percussion is stopped since it is one of the veins which swells in such a way as if cords flee, and from those it is which is full of venousness and when you pause the bleeding on that it contracts, and it is discovered the blood-letter; and the bleeding does not open the vein, and if it opens, that is tightened.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, for this reason, it is necessary that the blood-letter be fixed and examined in all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And pause the bleeding, but if the vein is punctured in one examination, it is good; and if not, you repeat this another time in the same place a little or quickly, if the place is not marked.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is marked or the patient feels pain, you leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage strongly, since a strong wound draws out a wound cautery, nor enter into the bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And repeat the bleeding if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and the blood flows gently, and you fear that not enough blood will come out, you repeat the bleeding in that place according to right and adjust it slightly, and do so quickly before the place is marked, since the place is marked in many men, fewer apertures should be made.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if it is already marked, you do not repeat it, since there is no excuse for any reason; and pause on that some part of the oil fissure, since it relieves the core of the blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place with oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly administer oil fissure in all bleeding with which the prohibition of blood core is made to the veins, and do that turmeric alfaldoc and sage when it is stopped from one of those on the place, since the blood is subtle and is rotated when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the location of bleeding a large wound is generated, since many times it happens, especially to one who has not been bled before that, or in the vein fissure little, and then you catch, and wash on the place with infused sponge in water and salt, slightly scalded, and tighten it for an hour, since it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	It is necessary to apply this to the suture of that vein's wound, or another vein's wound.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If it remains in the area for several days with any blackness or greenness, do not be concerned; if you wish, place something made of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or something made of juice from mint, camomile, or similar substances on it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Every now and then abscesses and elevations occur; in such cases, perform basilica lancing.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Therefore place your hand on it, and if you find it soft, apply pressure on it. If you find that the elevation is bad, be careful to place something from what I said earlier on it, for a strong flow will come out of the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Apply a plaster with what is astringent to harden the area, and care for it with another treatment until it heals.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	It is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the quantity of its potency and according to the color that appears in the blood, as will be explained later.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, allow it to settle until it turns red; and similarly, if you see it thick, allow it to settle until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, preserve its sharpness.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	To the person who is full and strong and has a need for bloodletting on one occasion, the incision of the vein should be widened and the lancing should be deep.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in the weak person, do the opposite of that, and it is necessary to extract it in many occasions, and let the puncture be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best type of incision for vein lancing is a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of vein lancing is safe from bleeding and nerve injury, and it is more approved and safer than vein lancing according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	In the case where fainting is common, perform vein lancing and care for it after the procedure with a piece of bread infused in milk of magnesia or simple oil softened; and extract blood from the vein in three to four occasions.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is congestion of the limbs, take something to drink before vein lancing infused in myrrh oil or sweetened honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and others, or scented and aromatic oil and a pleasing odor.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If fainting occurs due to excessive blood, it is necessary to perform vein lancing and drink water of meat and a subtle scented oil and use aromatics, and make his feet limp with it.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	Use the other causes mentioned in the division on fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	For the person who wishes to reduce their arm and dissolve their blood gradually according to an occasion, it is necessary for the one whose vein lancing is for excessive evacuation, and whose potency is weak, to remove the blood little by little, according to the quantity of potency in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	However, for the person who wishes to reduce their arm and expel blood gradually, and whose body is strong, do this approximately seven or nine hours after the first vein lancing.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	However, for the person who wishes to increase the blood in their body contrary to the separation where it is deficient, it is necessary that this be reduced on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	However, in the case where there is excessive and sharp blood in the body that causes fever, it is necessary to expel the blood from it once and in large amounts and widen the incision until fainting occurs, since you will have observed all the conditions of vein lancing; and place your hand on the pulse of it so that the heart does not stop beating due to fainting. This happens when the vein-lancer is ignorant and negligent in many occasions.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	If you wish to release the arm and expel blood gradually according to an occasion, when the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult to extract blood from it, press strongly on it with vehemence and extend it slightly, for that is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Let it be left until it is lanced again; or remove what is coagulated in the orifices of the vein from the incision; or place something made of tarragon oil, or sage, and compress it gently until the blood flows out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is abscessed, leave it alone and do not touch it until the abscess is healed.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If the need arises to expel blood again and there is no excuse, then make an incision on that location or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called the "sinew of the arm" is lanced in the area of the cubit or basilica, when it is not contracted or hidden, for it is composed of these.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the vein lancing is that the patient immerses their hand in warm water until the probe becomes constricted and the vein becomes apparent.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And apply pressure firmly on that member which has a stricture in the middle; and perform fleybotomy according to the small transverse, not longitudinally or according to the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make a wide opening and your fleybotomy should be done on that joint, a small one.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the flow of blood is forbidden, then you should put your hand in warm water and allow the blood to flow into the water until you have reached your goal.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, you are excused from the hand's immersion in warm water, and the heart is stopped in warm water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The fleybotomy of this vein is saved compared to all the other veins, because after it there is no pulsating vein, nor nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The fleybotomy of the cube of the right hand is given to patients with liver disease.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the fleybotomy is that you apply pressure to the member or your hand, since it has been placed in warm water until the vein is inflamed and clearly visible to the touch; then perform a transverse fleybotomy; and if you incise it all the way through, it will not be noticeable.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	Be careful not to go too far with the hand during fleybotomy, because afterwards the nerves are exposed without flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And place your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not immerse the hand in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein and its flow will be forbidden.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	When blood is drawn according to the amount needed, you should pause over the oil and salt vein to prevent it from coagulating excessively; similarly, you must do this in every narrow branch.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the advantage of fleybotomy on that vein of the left hand is that it is given to patients with gallbladder disease.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	Perform similarly in the fleybotomy of this as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The advantage of the saphenous vein fleybotomy is for diseases located in the lower part of the body, such as those affecting the uterus and the retention of menses, and for the diseases of the lungs and ulcers of various parts and old sores, and their similar conditions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the fleybotomy is that the patient immerses their foot in warm water and performs friction on it until the veins appear; then on the joint of the foot with a strap; and the location of the vein must be pressed, and from there it branches out into the surface of the foot many ways.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, fleybotomy should be performed on the ball of the foot or on the side of the calf, because it is better and cleaner.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If you perform fleybotomy on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are located below it, and pause your fleybotomy where you perform the transverse, just as if you wanted to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	May the fleybotomies be useful.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if bloodletting is forbidden, then immerse the foot in warm water and let the blood flow out of it until it has been evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the fleybotomist makes a mistake in the first examination, then immerse it again in the fleybotomy for a short while, because the place is clean; and do not be afraid of trickery, but guard yourself against the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Similarly, perform on the saphenous vein of the other foot in the same way.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the location as we have said should be pressed below the wilderness of the hip.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The advantage of fleybotomy on this is for pain in the lower back when it is due to blood pressure.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the fleybotomy is that the patient immerses themselves in a bath, and they must press their buttocks tightly from the lower part of the back to above the ankles for four fingers, with a thin long bandage, which is not visible under it.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore, when it appears, you should perform fleybotomy as seems best to you and according to the transverse, which is better; or incise or excise it by incision or excision, because the location is clean.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	It is in many men weakened; and if you press it, and it is not noticeable by feeling, then perform fleybotomy on one of its branches, and that which appears between the foot and the "auricular" and "anular" (I'm not sure about these terms).
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	Be careful with the nerves and let the blood flow as much as you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then remove the stricture and pause on the location of fleybotomy and press firmly, because it heals easily.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	About ventosection and the qualities of using them.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventosections are for corns, or eruptions, or verrucas (warts).
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventosection is performed in two ways: one by scratching and extraction of blood, and the other by ventosection without scratching.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This wounding that is called ventozacio is done in two ways, either by fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	The twelve locations where wounding and bleeding are administered and extracted as ventozacio are the following: one in the place where ventozas are paused, which is at the back of the head, and it is the last division of the skull; the second location is from two parts of the neck; the third is at the chin after the jawbone, beyond the mouth; the fourth are at both spatulas; the fifth are at the alohoster, which is at the end of the buttock; the sixth are at two focils, which are two elbows' length; the seventh are at two cavilhas, which are the knees; and the eighth are at both cuoyssas.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Ventozation does not draw blood from the veins, but from small scattered vessels in the flesh, and therefore it does not obtain its virtue by this method, as is the case with phlebotomy; nor is it necessary to perform ventozation by fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion until the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	However, if it is necessary to perform ventozation due to disease or continuity, administer it at any time in the beginning of the month and at its end, as well as in the middle and at some other time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The reason is that in men, blood is produced too much before it needs to be extracted by ventozation and the head becomes heavy and swollen; and among those whose head becomes swollen and red, and their neck and face, and their head, and in the neck; and among those whose forehead becomes swollen and darkens, and thickens and dullness in their eyes; and among those who lose the place of their ventozation; and among those whose nose is congested; and among those who have a taste of blood in their mouth, or whose tongue hangs out and spits blood; and among those whose sleep is excessive, and those who wake up with pain, ulcers, and other similar causes for them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore, when the above symptoms occur in any of these causes, and particularly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command ventozation to be performed after two or three hours have passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	In addition to the ventozation of the neck, when it causes heaviness in the head and causes the eyes to sink, it is necessary that this be accompanied by evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This ventozation is at the site of phlebotomy in the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not proper to use it when there is complete bleeding or catarrh, as it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	Therefore, it is not necessary to use this in the elderly and in heads where there are diseases that cause coldness.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	However, in the case of continuous bleeding on that spot, it is necessary to command the ventozador to place his hand lightly over the ventosa at the sides, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	However, ventozation of the alkhekel is at the site of phlebotomy of the vena fusca and the basilica: and this causes coughing, constriction of the alkhekel and splitting of the alkhekel's sturment, as well as asthma, constipation, and repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	It is necessary to make a small incision in the ventozation of the alkhekel, for if it is paused too much, it generates weakness in the body and the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The ventozation of alhagdahan causes accidental pain in the head and otitis media, migraines, fevers, and dental pains; and it is at the site of phlebotomy of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	It is necessary to command the ventozador not to press his hand during wounding so as not to cut the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	Ventozation under the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and similar symptoms to the oral diseases that are located at the site of phlebotomy of alieric, which is between the lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	However, the ventozation performed on both spatulas causes caphatan, which is caused by repletion of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	In addition to the ventozation performed in the middle of the forearms, this also causes phlebotomy of three veins, that is, the basilica, fusca, and cephalica, as it draws blood from all those small vessels that are in the flesh, and the smaller veins of the other larger veins before reaching the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	Command the ventozador not to proceed with wounding, for the location is stripped of flesh, and nerves and arteries are located thereafter.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	This is a ventozation performed on the anus and causes diarrhea of the anus, as well as ulcers thereafter.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you should command the lancet-maker that it be a large lancet, and that it be made of horn, for the location requires strong incision; and forceful and thin lancets are to be pulled out easily with the scraper.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	The small incisions made in the groins must be cautious, for they draw blood from the entire body, and relieve old pain in the throat and stomach, and the bladder; they provoke menstruation, and relieve bothersome and swollen conditions; they are used instead of lancet-making for two wounds, and for bleeding from two veins.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, it should not weaken the entire body, and cause fainting in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the benefit of lancet-making is similar to the benefit of two small incisions in the groins.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the lancet is that you should stop the bleeding at the beginning and follow with quick pressure, and not prolong the position of the lancet, but rather pause it lightly, and leave it occasionally, and that the humors come to the location by natural means.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the wound turn red and swell, and the flow of blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then you shall scrape and repeat the pressure little by little, and take care in the arrangement of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For a man with rare pores and tender flesh, it is necessary that you scrape once and not press, so the wound does not become an ulcer.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	Command the lancet-maker to widen the scraping and make a small incision, and apply pressure with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary that you scrape twice, because in the first scraping the channel of fine flow to the blood and moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second scraping, search for the thorough extraction of thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is much purulent, make a third scraping to obtain the last.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract a small or little amount of blood at a time, this is sufficient for us with one scraping.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a large amount of blood, scrape with a deep scraping; and if we know that the blood is thick, it is necessary to scrape by means of a heavy scraping.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term "scraping" refers only to the depth of the wound.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the wound is thick, hard, black, and the pores are tight, it is necessary that the locations of the incisions be greased with more lenient, resolving oil; if it is in summer, use aloe oil or violet oil, or oil of two almonds, or oil of camomile or chamomile, or blood oil, and similar ones. If it is in winter, use oil of nutmeg, or oil of lily, or oil of camomilla, or blood oil, and similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick, grease with oil of amaranth, or oil of balm, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the lancet-maker has wide pores of tender flesh, it is necessary that oil be prohibited, and that the locations of the incisions for them be washed with warm water or boiling water from solatrum, or camomile water, or birch water, and similar ones.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the blood is of much moisture, wash the incisions with wine vinegar, or camomile water and similar ones.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excesses are thick, wash the incisions with old wine, or water of sansuc (sanctuary), which is more powerful, or decoction of anise, or camomille, and similar ones.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And the lancet-making must be protected from washing; but it should be administered immediately after washing for an hour or two, and it should sleep near the incision.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it necessary that the lancet-maker be restrained before performing lancet-making?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the lancet-maker or the one who must perform the bloodletting has a tendency towards anger and wind on sharp and inflamed blood, it is necessary that you take cold causing substances, such as milgranas (?), acids, and vinegar, laytiguas (?), secanabin (?), julep, and similar ones.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their food such as poultry, hawks, and meat seasoned with acidic foods, and similar ones.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if the temperament is cold, take warm eyssarop almiva (?) or eyssarop of asafetida from seeds and sumac, and a little odoriferous spice between thyme and nutmeg; and it should be commanded that he use moderation in drinking and eating, and pause the food of poultry and partridge and peacocks and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that on the day of venetization (ventozacio) and phlebotomy, the drink should be more than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is necessary to give some men tincture of turpentine, or medicaments of musk, which is musk oil, or alcelin before venetization or phlebotomy, or immediately afterwards, so that the main members may be comforted and the blood be refined; and they should not take any nourishment.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	However, the ventozas that are not incisions are those that are closed in the liver, on the spleen and gout, at the navel, in the joints, and the pustule of the anus, because these members cannot bear incision upon them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And not for these (incisions) is it sought but rather the drawing of blood from a member, such as closing a ventosa on the breast in anemia caused by bleeding of the nostrils; and they use this to dissolve stagnant, thickened air in the limb, such as closing it on the abdomen or at the navel; for it rarefies the limb and relaxes it, and reduces swelling.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And when it occurs in their oppilation (obstruction) or porra (boil), a ventosa is placed on the throat because by its strong attraction it relieves obstruction and eradicates the porra from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, when a ventosa is placed on the liver or spleen to dissolve stagnant air in those parts enclosed (cavities).
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These ventozas are administered with juice alone, while others are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some of them (ventozas) are administered full of tepid water in diseases of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is why the ventosa should be filled and made large, which can be tepid water alone or water in which appropriate herbs have been steeped.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of ventosa administered with fire: the diameter of the orifice should be two fingers' width, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the plaster (preon) should be the size of a palm; and in the length of it, at the circumference, it should be the size of the area, but the thickness should be small according to the amount that can fit into it with an awl.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of raw wool or citron peel, with thick edges, lion's beard, and clean and dry for it not to irritate the member while it is in place on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it should be placed in the middle of the plaster or iron plate where the candle is held with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this ventosa should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and a little smaller according to the disease and the condition of the person who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the ventozas for infants and weaklings are different from those for young men and strong-bodied ones.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of placing this ventosa with fire on the limb is that it extends the skin with a proper amount of fire, while keeping a little bit of wax candle nearby, and placing it in the middle of the transverse part of the plaster, in the middle of the ventosa, so that the fire is lit away from the patient's body parts to prevent burning the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	The latter (ventosa) should be placed on the limb of the patient, and it is over the part we have mentioned, until when we have the ventozas and do not need to press down on it, and let the vapor escape from that part; then the ventosa will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And heat (fire) the skin according to its manner, and repeat this procedure if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	However, in the case of the ventosa used for pleurisy, with water (which has no transverse part or plaster), it is not pressed down on but filled with water and placed only on the limb.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: The larger this ventosa, the better, as it can receive more water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 75.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguisugas are not administered in any members except those where the position of ventozas is not possible due to their small size, such as the eyelid and gums; or in a member denuded (devoid) of flesh, such as the mentioned ones (eye and nose).
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using these is to find sanguisuga in clean, purified water.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	They should be boiled during the day and night in clean water, without any cause remaining in their stomachs; and they should evacuate the body at the beginning with phlebotomy and ventozas; and they should rub the member of the patient until it reddens; and they should be placed on them.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when filled, they should be used.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if juice can be obtained from the site with the ventosa, it is more helpful as an adjunct.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, then wash the site with vinegar and rub with clean water; and it should be squeezed (pressed).
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the body's corpse is prolonged near the swelling of veins and it drains, then you thrust a cloth into cold water and place it on top of the affected area where the drainage should be stopped.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the body's blood is prolonged (swelling), then you sprinkle powdered vitriol tri-sat or similar substances of astringent causes onto it, until the blood is drained; or, if the boils are stopped, fava beans that have been cooked and crushed should be placed on the affected area, and they should remain there until the beans adhere to the area, and the blood is drained.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	If necessary, incision of swellings (boils), if possible, is to be made.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If the swellings (boils) are forbidden to hang (suppuration), then they should be cleansed with fresh blood or a needle should be inserted into the areas where pus emerges; and they should be covered, as soon as pus appears in them.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you want to make an incision (to drain), sprinkle a little alum powdered, or salt, or ashes over it and wait for it to dissolve.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the process of the third division (treatment): restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is mainly concerned with the art of medicine, and it discusses the restoration of fractures and dislocation accidents in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh son, understand that this chapter is ridiculed by foolish doctors and the common people and those who do not take time to read the works of the ancients or read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, the practice of science in our land is restricted; and I have not forgotten it for a long time, but have only followed what follows after, through prolonged reading of the works of the ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the knowledge from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And direct to experiment and study for the rest of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	I have already described in this chapter everything that contains the main knowledge and on which my experience has been based; here I summarize it for you and relieve you of unnecessary length; here I summarize in summary form; and in conclusion, I demonstrate it; and I shape many forms of instruments used in this treatment, as I have done in the previous two chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter One.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections regarding the causes of bone fractures, from which a premise is necessary before beginning the recall of broken limbs and various types of each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us say in the preamble of this chapter the summary of the sermon; and the chapters whose understanding the craftsmen and those who are waiting at the station are familiar with before beginning the work, so that you and those who can learn or understand this noble art may do so.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or swelling occurs, you must first approach it with phlebotomy (bloodletting) or alignment, or whatever is not prohibited by any cause, such as debility of the patient or someone who has just suffered an accident, or an elderly person, or a time of intense heat or cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And ensure that the food is cold in herbs and bird meat (game) and crab; and prohibit heavy meats and filling with viands or any food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of a cauterized wound, and if you do not fear effusion of matter on the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And return the patient to his original regimen with which he is accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And since the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods rich in nutrients, thick and heavy, containing viscosity, such as foods made from wheat boiled in water, rice, beans, peas, beef, fresh fish, large grapes or similar, and with this diet coagulation of fractures occurs more quickly and easily.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	You should know that the bones broken in men of the first youth and in old people cannot be continued or consolidated according to their nature due to the drying of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	They are continuously and consolidated according to their nature all the time due to the drying of those limbs, and they are only continued and consolidated at the end of infancy, such as the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Nevertheless, nature adjusts and binds the fractured bone in any part due to a cause similar to glue, where thickening adheres to it until it is consolidated and healed together until the end of swelling and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, until some other cause does not prohibit it from its effects.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, the patient's food must be stopped, foods that are heavy and thick and viscous, as mentioned earlier.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Diversity of fractures according to diversity of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	Know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the thigh bone is different from the fracture of the skull; and the fracture of the leg bone is different from the fracture of the arm; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And beware of remembering every species of fracture, explained in its own chapter and distinguished from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Know the diversity within each species of fracture itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The species of fractures in the bone are diverse within themselves; for what is called a bowed fracture is different from one that happens at a star-point; and some fractures occur according to the length of the bone: and those of the patella and ankles, whether they come or do not come, as is the case with a fracture when it is prepared for writing, and is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and is a fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each species has its own pain or torment in healing it, as there will be a reminder of the distinction of it in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Identify the sign of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	A fracture of the bone is recognized by its twisting, and from the prominence and perception of it to the sensation, and only when you press on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore, if there is no appearance of twisting in the location or it does not hurt when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there may be twisting or a small fissure, in which case you must press on it with your hand and compress it all; wait for the medicine to come to mind appropriate for that moment in that location; and apply tight by subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	Know that the location that is arched and not split in two or other cases that do not occur at the ankle, such as the entire part of the shaft broken off, then it is necessary to begin your time for the correction of it by applying an abscess cauterization.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess has formed, then leave it for several days until the abscess subsides; and apply a drainage to it according to any method that you can do with delicacy and skill.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	Know that the healing of it and the draining of it is lighter than a fracture in which such an ankle occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Strengthen it according to what comes to mind about it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if in the bone there is an ankle, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, whether it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	Place your position such that you hold the member in its natural position while the parts are being extended from the broken member, then perform so that you make the additions return with skill and according to any method that you can do in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Be careful that your strength does not harm the patient by your operation or injury, and perform so that you apply one bone to another according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	It is necessary that at that time you touch it with your hand, and if there are any other causes here, correct it and drain it according to the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors do many times cause abscesses to form by their operation or cause contractions in the member as has been seen by the operation of their many times foolish assistants.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And annex, equalize, decent operation and constriction of the member, rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make him avoid what harms it in the hours of his vigils and sleep, and observe its rotation and agitation, and you should attend to all its needs; and you should take care of all its movements with all your virtue; and wait until the position of the member is a position in which pain is assured, the cause of which is because he feels in the position of the injured or broken member, then it is necessary that you change it to another position in which he does not feel pain; and guard against so that the position of the annexed part is straight and closed, so that the member does not become twisted when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the broken member is the one I recommend; for you should know that the fractured members are diverse in their smallness and in their size, and in the shape of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, such as the arm and thumb and similar ones, then it is necessary that the wrapping be made of very thin fabric.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are large, such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary that there be a broad and hard wrapping, because the thick lining strengthens the large member throughout with constriction and closing, so that dirt does not enter there.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And begin, according to your evacuation of equalization, pause appropriately in this, on the location of the fracture with three or four wrappings depending on the member; and strengthen your hand slightly with the lining.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Approach the broken bone area at its highest point, and tightly bind what is not your wound with what you have used to restrict the fracture site.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Approach slightly further away from the fracture location, loosen the bandage gently and slowly, until you find a large opening in that area.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Approach and take another bandage, cover the observed fracture site with this new bandage, and move away from the fracture towards its distal end; your operation should involve tightening the bandage and softening it as previously instructed in the first bandage.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Approach and place between the bandages of leather or cloth that are covering the twisted nature of the fracture (if there is a twist), but if not, do not stop for any reason in this area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Approach and pause over the other bandage, and approach again over these bandages with well-made pins as soon as there is no inflammation or cauterized abscess at that location; then pause over where the abscess is and stop the inflammation; leave this for several days, and then strengthen over the pins.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The pins should be of cane reed or similar material, and well-made wisely; or made from pine wood; or from the limbs of palm trees. Each pin should be as wide as shown in this shape and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the pin that is placed over the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the other pins, and the length of the pin according to the member's size and proportions; and tighten over the pins with another bandage as previously instructed; and tie this above the pin securely as previously described, and your binding should follow the location of the fracture more closely, and the farther from the fracture, the less binding is needed.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	The threads should be of medium thickness and fineness, made from flax; and if the threads are thick (as I have seen foolish people using ropes as threads), this is a great mistake because it disturbs the equality of the binding.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Subtle threads are not suitable, because you will not be able to achieve binding with them as desired, and it is not appropriate for there to be a gap of more than one finger width between each pin.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the patient is injured by the ends of the pins near the binding in those areas, then pause far away from them with leather or camelid wool until it does not harm him.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are with ulcers, and there is a break in the tendons, and I will come back to that in a separate chapter about specific cases.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	Know that every broken member is not straightened by pins on the first day; this happens because when the member is large, it is not necessary to place pins immediately, but rather after about five or seven days, depending on your certainty of the advent of a cauterized abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the way healers used to treat fractures, dislocations and twists with these plasters (which we will discuss later).
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Common plaster method for the restoration of fractures, suitable for complex cases and more often for women and children because it does not require heat or pressure: take powder from grinding (made of wheat milling residue), and it is the soft part of the flour that you grind between the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	Prepare it in this way if it is possible, but strain it through egg whites, and the consistency of the mixture should be neither thin nor thick; then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of treating dislocations, fractures, and sprains: recipe for asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach (a mixture of wild sage milled and sifted), totaling one ounce; myrrh and aloes, half an ounce each; alochil, twenty times the amount of myrrh and aloes combined; all ingredients are mixed with warm aloe oil or albumen if the patient's complexion is scaly; use this plaster, as it has a good composition and restores broken bones lightly, conferring strength to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another plaster method for fractures and sprains: recipe for migrach, white alum, myrrh, and aloes, each half an ounce; acacia, six drams; Armenian pitch, twenty times the amount of myrrh and aloes combined.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are mixed in a mortar with contraction agent, sieved, and compressed with water or egg whites and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and soothe pain in those areas and wounds and fractures: take woolen cloth and immerse it in sour wine and olive oil and place it on the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	However, this plaster does not have the virtue of healing, but rather for treating abscesses and expelling pain directly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster for healing fractures: take fig leaves and wild poppy leaves; grind them all into a plaster.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A shortened plaster for healing fractured bones and the resolution of abscesses: take a mixture of alum, camomile, violet flowers, barley flour, and all ground together. If the member is not scalded, mix all and compress with wine.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	However, if it is scalded, first compress it with water from comfrey leaves or water and use that.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of a strong plaster for resolving an abscess that lasts a long time and requires the healing of the member: take a mixture of alum, its seeds, balm, clover, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, everything ground together; mix with water from willow or sweet water or wine, all according to the quality of the member and the color of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not say in his book that a plaster should be placed on the broken member for its healing except for a wax made of wax and oil and no other cause; he recommends it to be neither too thick nor too thin.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	However, in Gaul it is seen that plasters are placed on the broken member for its healing and the causes in which there is dryness with little heat such as myrrh, incense, and similar to those causes that I have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of a plaster for injury and pain: take ground poppy seeds, human skin scrapings or eagle feathers, alum, salt, all ground together; sieve and compress, then make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount that is required to keep the laceration together and make it heal quickly depends on whether there is pain or swelling or if the bone is not in its proper place; then you do not need to undo it for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is intense pain or swelling or inflammation at the site, you must either cover it or undo it at that time and apply a plaster to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take cloth from it and sea sponge, wet with lemon water, and immerse that in tea-colored water; then wash the area where the swelling and pain cease; allow the member to rest for an hour; then place a cushion over it of woolen cloth dipped in sour wine and olive oil or rose oil, and let it remain there for a night until you are sure the abscess has healed and the inflammation of the member is reduced, and the pain is alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply subtle constriction and a small plaster gently and do not strain it with your primary constraint, and apply the subtle one until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess, the redness, the pain, the inflammation, and all the symptoms are completely healed, and no plaster or constriction is needed, then remove it as you did at the beginning gently.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause affecting the member occurs as we mentioned, leave it for about three to four or seven days. And if no cause affecting the member occurs as we mentioned, leave it for about twenty days according to what appears due to the dislocation of the member, as previously stated, until the fracture adheres and the flesh over it begins to coagulate.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then you adjust the narrowing more than your original narrowing in all places, and you adjust the swelling of the patient's food, according to what was previously remembered.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	However, if you see the location of the fracture already drying and extending more than necessary, you should know that nourishment must not reach it; therefore, you should wrap it with hot water continuously for all the days until then; let it be for three days; and alleviate the narrowing a little, and by this operation, the nourishment goes to the member, and it heals lightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	However, those who falsely restore the fracture of a member later when it was not restored at first, as necessary, and is restored in a crooked way, according to their operation, is an error, and there is great fear; if they had been righteous, they would have enlarged Antiquity in their books and encouraged others to do the same.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen anyone of them doing that, so it is reasonable that they should not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter II: On fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are multiple, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are different, for some fractures are caused by striking with a weapon, which breaks all the bone into pieces, which is then left exposed, as when this happens in the ribs, and in this case, that type of fracture is called a crush; or the blow cuts through a part of the bone, and cuts through the skin but does not penetrate to the back of it; and this type of fracture of the bone is called an absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the wound of these two types of fractures is either large or small, and whether the fracture is contracted or attracted; and it is caused by striking with an iron or stone hammer, and similar things.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this type of fracture is either penetrating and approaching the periosteum (which is left exposed by the bone); or it is in the face of the bone, and the wound of these two types of fractures is either large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And the type of fracture that has been reduced in the bone at its fine and delicate part is called this type of fracture capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And the fracture that is caused either by hammering or striking with stones, which makes a layer of bone enter into the parts inside, and it occurs in concave places such as when it happens to the handles of pots when struck and enters into the parts inside.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Moreover, this is done in damp bone cavities, such as the heads of children.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And to all these types of fractures, they are treated like thorns separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will remember everything in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we will recognize all these types of fractures by detection on it and investigation of them with trials and tests of rotten flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The capillary type is recognized by this that is uncovered on the bone, and it is removed, and it limits it with the test, as the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, first consider the patient's accidents, and if you see by manifest signification on fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, abscess of the throat, fainting, acute fever, ulcers and redness of the same in major dispositions, it is doubtful that they will heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see non-occurring accidents, you hope for health, and then you begin treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if it has been brought to you with the wound at the beginning as it was in the days of winter, then it is necessary for you to study the position of the bone by the twelfth day according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary for you to find the bone position by the seventh day, since what is left exposed by the bone is rotten due to the periosteum, and the accidents that we have mentioned occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already been exposed to the periosteum covering the brain, and is in small and attracted parts, then you must incise the compressed and attracted parts, as I will remind you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	It is that you wash the patient's head with the wounded area, uncovering the bone according to custom and your ability according to the shape of the wound, and it should be gentle on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it occurs to you, you must detect the bone, let flow blood or pus cauterize it, then oppose yourself to it with what is necessary, and it is that you place compresses of damp cloths infused in wine and warm oil, and allow the wound to rest until it is sedated by the pus, and make sure there is bleeding; and begin with the circumcision of the bone and its ablation.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And it is according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The first method is that you insert the bones with bone forceps narrowly like this, and this is its form: And administer another bone forceps slightly wider than that, and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And administer the bone forceps wider than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary that you have a certain number of different bone forceps, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and should be at the end of the sharpness of their extremities, and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	Use them with ease when striking the bone forceps to avoid hitting the skull and damaging it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is hard and strong, then it is necessary to perform a perforation around it before administering the bone forceps with the non-penetrating levers, which are called non-penetrating levers.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	They are not called so, but rather because they do not reach the end of the bone towards which the lever is directed, as the end of the lever has a rounded extremity or margin above the sharp end of it, preventing it from being submerged and passing through the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you take a large number of these levers, each one appropriate for the thickness of each bone, until it is present in all parts of the brain the sharp end of which is acute, the quantity in length and width being according to the thickness of this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the shape of three types of levers: The quality of performing a perforation around the broken bone is that you place the lever on the bone and rotate it with your thumbs until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then release the lever at another location, and place it where it completely traverses the thickness of the ray or environment.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Then insert the bone forceps between each crack of the bone, and make it as thin as possible so that you can push it through to the end, as we have said, until you find the bone, or with your hand, or with some other means using various tools which you will prepare for this purpose, such as chisels and delicate forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	It is necessary that you take great care that the bone forceps do not touch any nerve.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	Therefore, when you perform a perforation around the bone and it is continuous with the nerve, and you have separated it, you must cut and extract it, taking great care to smooth and round its edge with another tool similar to bone forceps, but rather finer and more delicate than the others.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small fragments of the bones remain scattered and shattered, you take it with ease using the tools at your disposal; then treat the wound with linseed oil and ointments that we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other method of operation is simple and easy, far from fear, which is called Guillaume and the lausage for great praise; and this is its meaning: It is necessary at the beginning that you begin to uncover the fracture in the location where it is most visible and violent, until when you have discovered that part of the bone and placed the tip of the narrow and delicate bone forceps gently on it, which has the following form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	It is that the partida lenticular (concave fracture) is lion-shaped and not penetrated, while the partida aguda (straight or angular fracture) is directed in two directions at a right angle to its length, as sometimes occurs; so that the concave fracture should be aligned with the nerve with the sharp end of the bone forceps inserted into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Then you should strike the bone forceps on one side of the fracture with a small mallet until you have inserted the entire bone gently as it is turned, and you should be sure that no panic occurs in any way during this procedure; and if the doctor was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant among them, certainly he would have been asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then if there remains any nerve or soft tissue attached to the bone, you will dislocate it with the rounded tip of the bone forceps, and remove it gently, as it is freed from pain and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the nerve, and what is separated or remains outside the bone is its surface, and it remains rough and small fragments, then it is necessary to smooth that roughness and remove those small fragments with small, sharp razors which you have prepared in various sizes so that it is possible for you to administer them in all places as most conveniently and correctly as possible according to where your operation of the broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	It is necessary that you administer in your reasoning with the balance which saws the bones at the beginning and place it near the puss, and approach it to the subtle puss of it, and do not cease doing so continuously until you have succeeded in administering the puss tea and the subtle puss of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In every small capillary fracture and subtle fracture, it is necessary to administer care according to what is lost in the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because not all of those who have studied in that art are equal.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	Stand on what we have written about large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the tissue is straight when you cut the bone, then it is necessary to take cloth from him according to the size of the wound and immerse it in rose oil, and place it on the orifice of the wound; and take another folded or tripled cloth, immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth lightly, but do not press too hard on it; and administer the liquid plaster to it, but do not force it more than the size of the wound alone.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Leave that one with this care for a day or two until you are sure of cauterization; and then loosen it and administer medicines with which excessive dryness is unnecessary, such as linen rags and flour of wheat, and powder of alum and aristolochia, and similar to these.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	It is that you make powder from these medicines and sprinkle it over the wound, so that it becomes dry; and in general, administer all medicine with properties that help heal and do not cause pain.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Watch that the wound in your treatment remains clean; and do not let it become infected or rot; nor allow virulence to accumulate in it; because when it is placed on the brain tissue, it corrupts it and poisons the patient, and brings upon him an evil malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	It happens in the skull cavity, as the bone is molded and especially when treatment of it is started, and becomes black on its surface; therefore, consider whether the patient experiences the symptoms we mentioned, for it can be harmful without doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If the blackness does not come from the medicine that is applied to it, but rather from the nature of the medicine itself, then it is necessary for you to take honey in one portion and three portions of rose oil. And over those linen strips, place another cloth and treat the wound with the appropriate medicines for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not actually broken, but rather two parts separated with elevated sores or one of those areas observed because it has two bones, as the lower part is cartilaginous and is not really broken, but rather bent, twisted, and swollen.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of the nose is actually broken, it is necessary that you insert your little finger into the patient's own nose and guide the fracture from inside with your little finger, and apply pressure to the outside with your thumb or fingers until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	Make it as easy as possible for you and be careful not to cause harm to the patient during this procedure.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and not in the lower part, it is necessary to align it with the tip of the finger where there is a small depression.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you shall make it appear as though [it] is healed.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Cover the affected area with lint on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, hold a hot or cold compress to promote healing.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	Insert a piece of cotton cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one place, or put two fingers, if the fracture is in two places, and make sure the fingers are thick enough to fill the nostril cavity.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Some of the old restorers wrapped the fingers in bandages and kept them bound all day, but I have not seen this done; however, it is necessary that the cotton be wrapped in oil of hyson with powdered myrrh, and apply the bandage inside the nose where the bone is stabilized and the cartilage hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Sometimes it is necessary to insert a piece of lion cloth into the nostril instead of a finger, especially if the fracture of the nose is severe and the patient is not prevented from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do it, and if you wish, use fingers.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If another swelling occurs, fill the nose with beeswax or cotton soaked in sour vinegar and rose oil, or with yarrow juice.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if no swelling occurs, you must apply the following inside: starch and powdered chalk mixed with oil of hyson, and place a piece of lion cloth over it, without putting anything in the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the nasal bones are fractured and the fracture is small or comminuted, then you must cut them apart, remove them with the instruments appropriate for the case; and suture the incision, treat it with what heals and strengthens, and apply appropriate ointments.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If an ulcer occurs inside the nose, then you must treat it with fingers and administer lead cannulae until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture is not ulcerated, consider whether the fracture is only outside, not broken in two and curved at the edges inside, then the recognition is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Then if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jaw, you should insert the right index finger; and press the swelling of the fracture inside the bone with one hand and straighten the edges outside the bone with the other.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension on both sides according to right angles until equilibrium is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If the teeth are dislocated or displaced, strengthen those that you expect to remain with gold wire, silver wire or lead wire; and place a cotton swab over the broken jaw, place a double cloth on top of it, and place a large steel needle correctly made, or a single thick thread along the length of the jaw; and hold them in place according to what is suitable for healing and application until they are not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Tell the patient to rest and have a diet of sweet cakes with honey.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you fear that the shape has been altered in some way, then you should remove it on the third day and rectify what has already been altered with powdered myrrh, oil of hyson or starch, since you will have left the cotton swab in place, and place a layer of woolen lint over the ointment.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And so, once the plaster is attached and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it in place until it heals and strengthens the fracture, because this fracture will often be tightened within three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another swelling occurs, administer what has been said several times in the treatment of it until it is healed and the swelling is removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is ulcerated, consider whether it is a bone fragment separated or in a cavity, then you must carefully remove those fragments with the appropriate instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the ulcer is narrow, you should widen it with a forceps according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have removed the fragments and they have not been reabsorbed, sew up the ulcer opening if it is wide; and if it is not, place one of the appropriate ointments over it and let it heal.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the collarbone (furcula) is broken at the joint in front, you must split the surrounding muscles to treat the fracture, and this type of fracture can occur in three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	If the fracture is simple (trencada), separated (seperada) or separated into two parts that do not involve complications, it is easy to treat; or if the fracture occurs in a complication and it is difficult to treat; or if the fracture is with an ulcer.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the procedure for a fracture with an ulcer is to have two attendants present, one to hold the broken collarbone and the other to extend the neck at the affected area.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then tie the fracture with wires placed in a shape that fits the bone and is not too deep or concave.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If additional extension is needed, then place a small cloth or wool square on the patient's chest, and adjust its size according to your needs; then extend and lift the collarbone and compress the area around it with your hand until you tie the fracture as necessary.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot bring the end of the collarbone to the joints outside (pervenguda al preon), then have the patient lie on their back and place a medium-sized cushion over the neck muscles.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The attendant presses the neck muscles on both sides to raise the collarbone in the joint and then you adjust the fracture and tie it with wires.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if the collarbone feels painful and is infected, you must make an incision over it and remove the infection with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the fracture is stuck in the bone, you must make an incision with one of your instruments, as you have prepared them for this purpose, because you have placed a chisel under the collarbone to split it; and the shape of the tool is like this:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And its concavity resembles a mortar; and adjust the width according to your needs, depending on the size of the bone or the depth of the fracture.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of the tool should be as you are able to operate it, having two ends like this, and one end should be wide while the other is narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the wound caused by the ulceration that you have removed from the bone is large and there is certain pus, then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the wound is small or you fear pus, then fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If pus appears, pour vinegar and rose oil on the cloth and place it over the area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	If the bone is fractured without an ulcer and there is a gap in the bone, then apply plaster made from flour and albumen of eggs, place it on a leather pad, and place your hand over the area if necessary; and prepare an emetic (humemate), which is a twisting object used by Saracens, that is long and its width is about one palm or slightly more; then place powders twice over the leather pad and the plaster; and prepare a thin stick of wood with a width of three fingers and a length similar to this; wrap the stick in cloth, wrap the cloth around the stick in the location of the fracture; and apply the emetic in such a way that it revolves on the patient's neck and back and over the affected area, reducing the gap until the fracture is completely reduced, and when the gap reduces due to compression, this should not be hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all that the stick is not harmful to the broken bone; therefore you must examine the patient every day, so that if the swelling subsides or the stick has been absorbed, you can adjust it and tighten the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then make the patient sleep on their back with their head raised slightly so that the support of the neck is raised from the base, and thus raise the collarbone in its position; or have the arms of the patient tied to the patient's neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	Do not remove the bandage if there is no problem in the location or pus, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the plaster if you see that it has deteriorated and adjust the bandage accordingly, allowing it to heal and for the fracture of the collarbone to be restored and for it to clot.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	It is strengthened and supported for up to 28 days, and in some cases it may take months for healing to occur.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of shoulder fractures.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The shoulder blade is broken in its lower part, but it is not completely shattered only along the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the lower part of the shoulder blade is broken and it is not known without touching, then prepare according to the shape of the fracture and reduce it according to its natural position in any way that is possible using your skills.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then place a cushion over the site of powder milled with alum and hulled poppy seeds, and place pulverized cloth; then place a cushion on the lead stylus of a fine table according to the amount of the spoon or slightly more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the lead stylus is concave in any of the spoon's locations, then fill that concavity with poppy seeds and place the stylus back according to its balance.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then bind tightly with a long, strong bandage and secure the stylus in place so it does not move from its position.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the dressing every day; whenever it becomes soft, replace it with a new one and tighten and adjust the stylus if it has moved from its position.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Wash the patient's hand.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spoon will be restored in twenty or thirty-five days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is complete, you should loosen the bandage, and you will know for certain that it is of the bones whose fracture or dissolution was not feared at the beginning.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If there is a bone protruding from the wound, remove the bandage, cut it off, and proceed as you did for the fracture of the clavicle with cauterization if an abscess occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	This line appears to be the title for a section on the treatment of broken bones in the foot (fracture of the foot).
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot is sometimes broken in a single location, but more often the ends of the bones move and become swollen and fractured.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	When the middle of the foot is broken, it usually declines into the joints and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, fever, heavy breathing, and vomiting. The fracture is evident in its cavity within the bone and cannot be hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The treatment of the fracture involves positioning the patient on their back and placing a cushion between their shoulders. Press gently on the muscles of the foot, adjust the toes with two fingers, be subtle in the operation and alignment according to all possible methods and what is appropriate, until the bone shape returns as it should.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then apply the plaster and stopper, then place the fine lead stylus (caligy) on top of it in a light manner, as you cover it with cloth; be subtle in wrapping the stylus around the fractured bone to ensure that it is not damaged; pass along the ridge of the back occasionally, and tighten it properly using a decent binding; always consider the positioning, and tighten it when it becomes soft.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If there is a need for the amputation of that area, you should use corrosive or disinfectant, or treat pain, abscess or other issues that occur in the location. In such a case, you should cut and remove it, and clean the wound using methods of healing; then apply the plaster, if necessary, to the affected area, and tighten it until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	This line appears to be the title for a section on the treatment of broken ribs.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a rib fracture does not occur in thin locations but rather at the joints between them; and the ends of the ribs do not contract from the joint in front but rather because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge of this is not hidden to sensation, so you must investigate it with the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The treatment should be to wrap the fracture with fingers according to possible methods until it is wrapped as needed, and then apply plaster and tighten the fractured bone with a lead stylus if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the rib fracture is declining into the joints, this causes intense pain and puncturing sensation like that of pleurisy, and for this reason you should cover the bones with gauze; this also leads to difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of bloody mucus; and this is a difficult healing process.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ancients were skilled in dealing with such matters using clever methods.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And as they said: it is necessary to place food before the patient that causes inflammation and flatulence so that the abdomen becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed out of the joints.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we should be careful not to cause an abscess by applying heat, unless necessary, and if it occurs, you should help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	Some of the ancients said that it should be kept still above a wound and that it should be treated with strong juice; this is logical, but there is concern that the wound may attract excess fluid due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Some of the ancients said: it is necessary to cover the area with wool that has been soaked in hot oil, and place powders between the ribs until it is filled; ensure the positioning when wrapping it according to the ridge; and cure the patient with treatment for pleurisy using food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient is experiencing intense distress and cannot endure it, and pierces the skin with a pointed instrument, beware of the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision at that location, expose the broken rib, and place your hand over the instrument that supports the fractured bone, recalling its memory, and cut the bone easily and remove it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	Then adjust the two lips of the wound if it is large with sutures, and heal it with ointments until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If an abscess occurs within the body, then you collect and put powdered red pepper in oil and place it on the area, and heal the patient with whatever is necessary for treating an internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	Let him be placed on his side on the bed, until he recovers.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the repair of a fracture of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some cases involve fractures in the bones of the neck, and later the muscles contract, and similarly to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	When you examine a person and want to know if they will heal or not, consider that if their muscles are already softened, swollen, dead, and unable to grow or extend, and when you apply pressure or pierce them with needles without feeling pain, then you can conclude that they will not heal, and in such cases it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If the patient feels pain when applying pressure or piercing with needles, then you can conclude that the neck bone is saved and the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you suspect a fracture in the cervical vertebrae and want to know if it will heal or not, consider its weight.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you find that they are already softened (paralyzed), pay attention to those cases where it has happened in the muscles, and when he lies on his back, there is ventosity and obstruction without his will, and sometimes he is turned onto his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you can conclude that it is fatal, and therefore do not attempt treatment for it.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if there are no such causes, the situation is better and easier to treat.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment is to perform a drainage of the abscess on the swollen vertebra using cauterization with hot oil or sulfur, or by applying mustard plasters; place it over the swollen vertebra for several days until the abscess is drained.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then place a comfortable and soft cushion on the affected area and apply liniment to it; order the patient to rest, remain calm, and not sleep on the affected side until it recovers.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If there is the need to remove a broken bone or any cause that has already been determined, then you must cauterize the tendon and break the bone; then adjust the two lips of the wound, using sutures if it is large, and heal it with some healing agent from the entrails until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the little bone at the end of the coccyx is broken off and this marks the end of the spinal cord, then you must place your left hand in the anus and grasp the broken bone with the right hand as much as possible according to the position; then apply a plaster and splint if needed, and hold it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken tendons there, cut them and remove the bone, and heal the wound with the treatment that is prescribed until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Restoration of the ankle
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	When the bones of the ankle break, it is not just a fracture but communication at the extremities and they are displaced along with length and declining to the inner part; pain occurs in the location and puncture, and the joint is stunned when there is a fracture.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of it (the ankle) is that you stretch your hand over the entrance that is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is only at the extremity of it (the ankle), then you bind it according to what is appropriate for you by equation, binding into the one that is similar to its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the long or one that declines towards the inner part of it (the ankle), then you make the patient lie on their stomach before preparing the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have bound it (the ankle), wait on the plaster, and place your hand over that splint of wood or fabric, and tighten by compression on the one where you fear not fracture puncture nor removal of the nail.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And bind the concavity with that which fills it from inside, so that the compression takes place according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess is cauterized, you stop the extension and restoration of it (the ankle) until the cauterized abscess is sedated, and place over it the one that soaks according to what was mentioned earlier; then return to the restoration of it, and tighten it as before.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	But if there is a disease in the bones that are pulverized or shattered, you treat them (the bones).
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Restoration of the dislocation fracture.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutor is that which is between the arm and the neck of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it (the dislocation fracture) is broken, the restoration of it is one of two ways, of which one is that you take a thick wooden splint as follows:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let them be connected at both ends with laces, and place it (the splint) suspended from the higher location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Follow the patient on a sled; and place his broken arm over the splint towards the tiltick of it in the middle location where the curve of the splint is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And suspend it (the splint) over some serious cause, or else the physician extends it to the inner parts; and place the physician and their hands on the fracture, until the fracture returns as necessary.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other way is that the patient lies on their back and suspends their hand from their neck with a rope; and command two servants to place one of them over the fracture with their hands, and the other under it, each extending to their respective sides.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be more forceful, tighten on the fracture with a rope and on it (the splint) with another rope, and each of the two servants extends to their respective sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	Therefore, if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, it is necessary to place half of the rope on the tilting point and the other half below the fracture towards the arm.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly, if the fracture is in the elbow, it is necessary to place the rope on that location and on the elbow.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Bind it (the splint) easily and without effort, and when it is bound according to what is necessary and is properly applied, tighten it if there is no cauterized abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess is cauterized, you must release the compression for up to seven days, and place over it linen soaked in warm vinegar and rose oil until the abscess subsides, and then tighten it (the splint).
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of tightening it (the splint) is to place plaster on the fracture and then cover it with a woolen blanket over the plaster; and adjust the arm on the adjutor, and place a soft cushion under the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And cover the wool and tighten on the adjutor the arm so that the arm is in the correct position, if there is no prohibition of any kind due to the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And use nails (to secure the splint).
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And place the nail over the fracture which is broader and stronger than the others; and place a space between each nail equal to the width of the finger, and the length of the nails according to the breakage with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And tighten on the nails with the compression as mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And your compression over the location of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And as the fracture is longer, the compression should be smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And therefore, if you find the placement of the nails and compression as described at the time when you restore the member to its proper position, then do it (the treatment).
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if there is a fear of cauterized abscess, you release the compression and nails for up to seven days as mentioned earlier.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Consider the rope in all parts for three days so that there is no pressure or inflammation at the location, or food is prohibited from reaching the member due to excess compression; therefore, correct everything as described earlier.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are certain that no cause of this will occur, do not undo the ligature except after three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	The patient's bed should be on their back, and his hands on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Place a hot, woolen poultice filled with cooked cereal on the broken limb and consider at all hours of the day or night that neither the figure of the fractured member should be divided nor dissolved, or the soft ligament loosened, for this will correct everything in its power.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	The patient's food should be given according to the order that was previously prescribed for him, provided that his food is subtle at the beginning until it becomes stronger; and then his food should become coarser.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The assistant and the bed should be strong for forty days, and then they should be undone and administered a bath and medication which correct it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is laid open, you should not undo the ligament and splint for days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is made up of two bones which are called the focal bones; one of which is small and is the one that touches the elbow, and the other is large and is the one placed below the small one, from the lower side of the elbow.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	If the large bone is broken only, or if both bones are shattered together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small bone above is broken, the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is more easy.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And if the bone below the fracture is broken, that condition is bad and healing it is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And this condition is even worse when both bones are shattered together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the broken bone is the small one above, it is appropriate for the doctor to pause a small extension with ease before the healing process begins.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	However, if the large bone is shattered, it is necessary to pause a stronger extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If both the testicles are crushed together, then you must stop the bleeding not too strongly.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	Then you must stop the wound by restoring and extending its shape on a cushion, and place your palm at the sides above, as well as all the other things mentioned earlier, and the one with the ear should be lower than the others, and the patient should be seated on a chair with a low back.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	Place a cushion in front of the patient at an elevated or slanted position to prevent them from straining too much.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	The servant extends the patient's arm above the affected side with their hand or strap, and another servant does the same on the opposite side.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	The doctor should bind the bone together so that it returns to its best possible shape.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If the fracture of the bone is suspected, then you must penetrate deeply into it and reduce all tissue in its place with your strength.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If a separated wound appears that is not likely to heal on its own, then you must amputate it and remove the affected area as we have said before.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	However, if the fracture is a wound, then we have already addressed that specific case, so treat it accordingly.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If an abscess occurs at the beginning of the healing process, then you must line a cloth with a mixture of rose oil and white wax (of medium consistency) and lay it on top with a subtle binding to allow the abscess to drain; then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster made from powdered milled medicinal herbs mixed with honey, and place sterilized needles nearby; and let the needle that is placed over the fracture be sharp and strong.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	Know that the names of the needles in the arm are in the greatest arrangement, or it is a fracture in one testicle or both testicles simultaneously.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Place your binding firmly and forcefully over the location of the fracture, and when more fluid starts to flow from above or below the fracture, loosen the binding slightly as described in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and damp, not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is sewn should be of medium consistency (neither too thin nor too thick), as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the limb and its strap for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If any cause arises that requires rectification, such as a swelling in the limb, then it is necessary to immerse the limb in warm water until the swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Loosen the limb without tying it until it has rested, then return the binding.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the fluid has become soft and the bone has healed as expected, then correct everything with your strength.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excess stricture, for then it must be softened slightly and left for some days until the nourishment reaches it, and strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient does not suffer from any of the causes mentioned previously, then it is not necessary to be loosened within approximately 20 days or thereabouts.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Then the patient's hand should be suspended for its ability to agitate movements, and make them sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	Know that this fracture heals in 30 or 32 days, or at least it is healed in 28 days, and all of these are according to the condition of the complications and the position of the limb.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that a fracture occurs in the thumb or fingers only from severe movements observed.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand is fractured or injured, then it is necessary that the patient remain lying down and hold their arm stretched out as much as possible, and place their hand on the affected area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the healer should extend the broken bones and the physician align them well with good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	It is necessary to apply plaster and lint, unless an abscess is formed; then place a steel over the area according to its size, and you have already wrapped it in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the fracture is in the palm's inner part, make a bandage-like cover and command the patient to hold it with their broken palm, and it should be strengthened with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	The steel should have a cushion of cloth for lift, to apply it to the palm and hold it as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is in the outer part, then it is necessary to place a steel over the area and another steel on the opposite side of the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and place a bandage around it, as the hand is turned to the wrist between the fingers with lint.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If there is a fracture in one of the fingers' joints, if it is hollow, align it as needed and hold it with the palm, and if you want, place a small straight steel over it to raise the fracture and avoid bending.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in any of the other fingers, such as the middle finger, or index, or auricular, or annular, then it should be aligned and splinted with the finger where it occurs; or all of them should be splinted continuously, which is better; or place a small steel over it, as mentioned in the hollow.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	Consider in your restoration and take care of the abscess formation and its opposition - with its operation - what is needed when any of those causes occur, according to the narrative given above.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a pelvic bone fracture.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The pelvic bone is observed to be broken and declared at the examination when it is converted to the lower part and the upper part.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration is done by strengthening the lint over the fracture and another lint under the fracture, and placing the patient on their stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then extend all the lint to the fracture's side according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is a rupture of the pelvis, the lint should be near the lower part at the side of the pelvic bone, so that the extension falls on top, and another lint under the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	Similar if the fracture is at the lower end, it should be made near the lower edge and the extension to the sides.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the physician aligns the bone with both hands inside to reduce it as much as possible according to its natural shape and the bone is joined well with good alignment; then it is necessary to apply plaster and bandage, unless the member forms an abscess.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess occurs, let it be for some days until the abscess is drained, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage of it should be like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times and remove excess; and wrap the thigh to reach the ankle and the pelvis.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long needle between the pelvis and the thigh near the lower side of the sides, and let the ends of the needle extend from the upper part of both sides, and turn it around the thigh and pelvis to remove excess bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Place a steel on the pelvis in the location of the fracture and place a small steel on the bone of the thigh.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Fill the voids between the thigh and pelvis with soft cloths to coagulate the extravasation.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And begin with a strong bandage in the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you get closer to the lint at the location of the fracture, your bandage should be less tight and more flexible and more moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Approach the end of both limbs of the field to the incisions, and press on either side of the nails of the other leg so that the incision is not displaced from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Approach the structure so that it does not affect the corroded member or cauterized ulcer or abscess or similar conditions; and if any such condition occurs, then be careful to remove it, and correct everything appropriately as we have previously stated.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a tumor in the bone that cannot be swallowed, then it must be burned off and removed, and the wound should be treated with the remedy previously mentioned until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	In some cases this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by adjusting it to the nails, as previously stated in the adjunct and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the treatment of such a fracture, it is important to avoid causing limpness in the patient; and if the fracture is restored alone, then the other leg should be immobilized as well, otherwise limping will occur.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You should know that the thigh heals in about 40 days or a few months at most, depending on the nature of the complications and other factors.
Capitol .xv.	Capital XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the treatment of a fracture of the ankle bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that the treatment for a fractured ankle bone is often difficult, but it can be done with caution and careful observation.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if a fracture occurs and it turns out to be merely a crack or break in its parts, then it is not necessary to take any action, as the pain will either subside on its own or persist, depending on the nature of the injury.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The treatment of such a fracture consists of aligning and securing the broken parts with the tools mentioned earlier until they are healed.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Place a plaster and place it over the round nail if needed, and use a bandage to secure it properly.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Consider all the precautions mentioned in the treatment of other fractures, such as cauterizing wounds and taking appropriate measures to prevent complications until the fracture heals.
Capitol .xvi.	Capital XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the treatment of a broken hip.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You should know that in the hip there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the hip bone, while the other is small and is called the pelvis.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	If the type of fracture occurs in either of the two bones of the arm, then the treatment is similar to the treatment for an arm fracture and the procedure is one and the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If both bones are broken together, the hip is completely shattered.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If the smaller bone (pelvis) is fractured, the hip is partially shattered.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If the larger bone (hip bone) is fractured, it can be treated by immobilizing it with the tools mentioned earlier, and this falls under the category of complications that are not easily dealt with.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Administer extension, alignment, and ligature of the nails as mentioned in the previous instructions.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the hip fracture has not been complicated by any other factors, then the extension should be minimal and gentle to alleviate pain.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	If there is any cause for surgery on the arm when treating a hip fracture, you will take pieces of wood from the pine tree and place them under the areas that have been immobilized, using palm branches for this purpose. Select smaller pieces where necessary, but avoid the knots, and let the length of these pieces correspond to the length of the hip bone and extend from the hip to the foot.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And you wrap each cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one on the division of the leg of one side and the other of the other side, and they should be from the thigh to the foot of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And you tie the three stones in three places of two extremities and at the middle one, because with this structure the leg is prevented from closing on the left and right sides, and it is good for positioning.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a cane-like splint has been administered according to the length of the leg; and the leg should be immobilized at that point to prevent movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Moreover, you must do this in a fracture, and when it is a wound properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And you must examine the leg every day and study it further, and you should keep it from getting gangrene or inflammation, or other similar causes; and when any of these causes occur, you then apply what is necessary until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the heel and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	A heel fracture does not occur every time; but sometimes a fracture occurs in the foot bones; and in the toes of the feet, a fracture rarely occurs, except an avulsion at times of displacement.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the foot bones are fractured and sometimes those bones are raised above themselves, then the patient places their foot on the ground prepared in this way as they walk.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And place one foot on that which is raised from those bones, and press down with the other foot, and hold them in place until they return to their original position.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And place a plaster and stopper on top of it, and place a small table beneath the foot, on which there are two flat plates.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And strengthen it with the foot in this structure, as you have wrapped it with cloths and other means of support that are necessary.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, you then remove the bindings, because you will find the bones bound together, fractured or displaced, and in such a case, the operation on them should be done accordingly.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if the toes are fractured, you then restore them and bind them as I and recommend to you in the repair of the hand fingers.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And place the fractured finger on a table according to the length of the finger, and make it slightly more oblique from below; and place the foot under this table that has been recommended by you, and strengthen it with an appropriate structure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if that which is fractured of the bones is two or three or more, you then place a support under each finger according to its size wrapped in linen cloth, and strengthen the table at the foot of the foot, and it should be standing on one of the plates of the table away from the belly of the foot so that it keeps it well.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is necessary for you to remember that you do not overlook all the causes that I told you about in the other fractures of accidents that have been mentioned, and apply yourself to every accident with what is necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the hump of a woman and the pelvis bone and the mons pubis of a man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hump of a woman is fractured, you then cause it to cease bleeding and incline it slightly to the side of two, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the midwife fills the hump of the womb with cotton, and you apply it to the hump in this way as you hope; and you press the woman, and raise her hips little by little, because all that is forgotten before it returns in front of the hump as expected and the fractured bone.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And you place a pillow under the hips and when it is necessary to urinate, you remove the cotton with ease and allow her to urinate; and you reduce it as before and return it to its original position, and then return the pillow to its first position.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Do this for seven days or around those days, because it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take once an oval bladder and strengthen over the groin with a willow cannula; and insert the entire bladder into the hump of it, and inflate the cannula with air until the bladder is inflated within the hump, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be filled with cotton and left for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the pelvic bone of a man or woman is fractured, you then administer for its restoration and treatment what we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right should not be hidden in these near fractures and which rarely occur, especially to that which has more study, practice and understanding of this book; because the fracture indicates to you in the greatest dispositions the right direction for restoration and treatment of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the mons pubis of a man when it is fractured, you take guarguamela leaves, and put the mons pubis into it; and place it under wraps of linen, and wrap it, and let it rest for three days or around those days, and healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of broken bones when they are infected.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is appropriate for one who suffers from an infected broken bone, especially if the bone is large like the hip bone or the humerus (arm bone), or resembling one of these, to immediately cut and scrape it, if the conditions for trepanation are suitable as previously mentioned.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the infection flows pus, then it is necessary for you to stop its flow by cauterizing it with the powder of three parts frankincense and one part sulfur, unless another cause presents itself.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin the restoration of the broken bone on that day itself, and do not delay it unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs cautiously, then you should delay the restoration of it for up to nine days, until the abscess is ceded, and do not approach it on the third and fourth day in total, as you will cause bad events (mishaps).
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone protrudes significantly above the dislocated joint, then it is necessary for you to pierce and reduce it with your hands and as little force and extension as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not prepared and the situation requires your hands and this tool, then use this tool to reduce it with your hands; the tool is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers, and its width according to the size of the wound; and the physician must take three or four inches depending on the quantity needed for the cure in all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	Whether it is round or slightly oblong, ensure that it is not doubled over in the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	It should have a sharp tip with an edge at its ends; and the handle of it should be thicker, and from the middle to the hinges.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its shape:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called in Greek "labre voluntas atelarem," which means little spoon.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Therefore, the tip of it should be raised above the end of the bone that protrudes significantly.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	You should insert it once and withdraw it before the bone is repositioned, and it should be aligned with some accuracy.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Therefore, force the fractured ends together, and if the broken end is fine, do not use the tool for good reason; instead, insert the fracture's edge into it until the tool has sufficient power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with the tool we recommend, then use one of those chisels that we mentioned earlier; or it may be one of the saws in any manner possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then remove that which remains rough and with small scores on the bone.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced, and the patient experiences intense pain slowly subsiding, you must know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and therefore, do what will bring great benefit to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	Once your bone restoration is complete, immerse a piece of black sterile linen in strong vinegar and apply it directly to the wound, especially during summer; do not cover the wound with any oil or other cause for it to become putrid and rotten.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Apply the steel probes during the time of your patient's bone restoration, and leave the wound exposed so that you can incise it with forceps and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Be very careful not to stretch the wound with the fracture, for many times fool doctors have caused death or corrosive or suppurating illness on their patients, and it is a sin.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the patient's wound is soft, pliable, and different from other fracture wounds.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the wound is large or a bad wound and you fear other harmful accidents that have been warned of, and pain occurs in the area, then do not place steel probes there but use hard bandages instead and tighten it with them.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when the wound begins after one or two days, which is caused by a blister, then remove the cloth that you had placed on it earlier and apply warm compresses, according to our custom we treat wounds with warm compresses such as tetrafarmacon and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is necessary for you to remove the dressing and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and it is important that the limb be prepared in such a way that the purulence flows from it towards the edges without difficulty.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound passes many days without being consolidated or separated from the blister, then you should know that here are the signs of gangrene, and therefore examine the wound with caution.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those signs that are separated and expelled, those that do not separate but enclose the limb and cause pain, pierce them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound is gangrenous or suppurative, that is, another type of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to stop it by applying one of those remedies described in its corresponding chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that which requires the best advice and you present your case: when the bone is broken, make an incision on the limb similar to the bones of the thigh and pelvis and like those of large members, but do not attempt to attract it or extract it, for many times this leads to death; leave it in place until it can be purged, for within about 20-30 days it may collapse by itself. And then cure the wound if you see it, and leave it if not.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20:
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of a nodule that occurs in the trace of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many times this nodule occurs in the trace of healing from a fracture, especially near joints, and is swollen due to the shape of the limb; and strong evidence prohibits the use of the limb for its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, consider whether the nodule is recent and administer medicines that have a styptic effect such as aloe, elderberry, and similar ones; take some or all of them, and compress them with vi stiptic, album of huou, or strong vinegar and place it on the nodule in a poultice, and press it firmly for good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the incision unclosed for several days; then remove it and apply another one until the nodule is gone; or press firmly on a lead plate, since lead has the property of hardening everything that is inflamed in limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	However, if the nodule has already become hard and is constricted and requires urgent removal, then cut it carefully along the most superficial part of the limb, excise the excess and eminence, or remove it with sharp scissors until it is gone; and heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When restoring a fracture, once it is restored and the limb remains subtle and does not follow its nature, [the treatment] follows... (The rest of this line or the next lines are missing to fully translate the text.)
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored and the limb remains subtle and does not follow its nature, it is done only for multiple reasons: one of which is an excessive amount of joint solution and ligament loosening that does not correspond to what is needed; or due to an overabundance of tightness in the ligaments before the nutrition is prohibited from flowing to the limb; or due to excessive swelling; or due to unnecessary movement not at the proper time; or due to a lack of blood flow within the patient's body and debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The treatment for this is to feed the patient and make his heart tender before the blood is multiplied within him; administer baths; and instill gawe and comfort upon him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then place a plaster on the limb, so that the plaster draws in the necessary nutrition, or continue swelling of the limb with warm water, until the nutrition flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of fractured bones that are restored twistedly and prohibit the operation on them as needed.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the restored limb requires healing of its twisted and prominent fractured bone and nodule, this is due to a deformation in the limb's form, but if the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, it does not need for you to receive the word that the fracture is new.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	However, there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is highly condemned as leading to great danger with the risk of death being imminent.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the limpness and nodule are recent, then they should be swollen with warm water in which are placed soft-soothing herbs such as dittany, raspberry leaves, mallow, and similar ones; and it should be made into a plaster with plaster made from the root of dittany or camomile oil, or pressed juices from the leaves of dittany and crushed camomile seeds, and this plastered on; or prepared figs with honey and mixed with pigeon droppings, similar to the medicines known as consolidators.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	In some cases it is dissolved with continuous gentle friction using the most humid materials, and the limb's movement should be administered throughout all parts at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	However, if the twist has advanced and is strong and converted into a stone and necessitates curing with iron, then it should be cut off at the end and the continuation of the bone should be dissolved, and what remains of the nodule should be removed using fine cutting tools and administered ease in that area with solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the topic of dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is essentially the displacement of one of the joints that cannot move, causing deformation in the limb's shape and causing the patient great pain and severe injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to perform the reduction as soon as possible and not delay it, for if it is delayed, the joint is destroyed and it becomes difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason it is not good nor straight in the time of the amputation, because many observations bring spasms and slow pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	However, when this occurs, you should prepare the patient for flabotomy, and the amputation area should be left free until it rests; and the limb should be swollen with warm water and oil, and it should be reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member should be healed by the remedy that will come in its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already organized the chapters on dislocation according to the precedent in fracture: from the upper division of the body to the lower division.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the two jaws are dislocated and not torn apart; and a dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are repositioned slightly with little movement, or they are completely dislocated and require complete mollification at the juncture until saliva flows from the patient's mouth and he is unable to hold it nor close his mouth, and the tongue of him is enveloped in his word.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation [of a body part] is slight, then in the greatest care, return it to its place with minimal handling.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and complicated, then it requires careful reduction and should not be delayed entirely.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	It is said that the assistant should hold the patient's head, and the doctor puts their hand into the patient's mouth, in the direction of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or the doctor places both hands together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the others hold the rest of the patient outside; and commands the patient to stop moving their jaws and let it go from each side; and the doctor guides the jaw and wraps it in cloth until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer warm water and oil before making the reduction easy, so as not to delay the reduction of both and not to delay the reduction of both entirely, as has been said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	Therefore, when they are returned and wrapped, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then pause over those powdered cloth pieces with wax and oil, make it of wax and rosin-covered linen; and place them with ease on the affected area.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	The patient should sleep on their back, and the head of the patient should be between two pillows, so that it does not move to either the right or left side; and do not make them chew any food forcibly; having their provisions be allowed to eat lions until when the pains are reduced and the jaws are relaxed, then do what you want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	That should be administered with ease, and you should not work on the opening of the mouth through eating and drinking or talking, until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some time and not returned to their places, then frequent fevers and strong sweating occur, and the stomach of the patient becomes inflamed, and strong bile is vomited.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you see this, know that it is disastrous; and frequent vigilance is required for the one who experiences this in ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not dislocated on the side through its continuity with the ribs; and sometimes it is dislocated on the outside, and this is apparent by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Place your hand on the affected area with strong compression, as it will return to its place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then place a cushion on that plaster and powder, and press it firmly.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	If the extremity of that which is cut off and joined with it is not dislocated in any day, then it must be reduced and aligned as I have said and as you are equipped to do so.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then place your hand on that plaster, and pound, rub, and press it, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this treatment method, reduce the extremity of the muscle when it has been separated from its location.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the insertion of the tendon to its juncture below.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the upper attachment of the muscle, and this is rare; it is not dislocated at the rear attachments by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front attachments due to the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	Furthermore, the muscle is more likely to be dislocated and protrude at its lower attachments, and this is more common in those with less flesh; however, in those with thicker flesh, it may protrude with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	But it often happens to some men due to a blow or fall, and the muscle of the affected person is surgically removed with a cautery incision, and it is treated as if it were already dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, you should determine if you are treating the correct area and proceed with the treatment of the affected part.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	It is well known that the dislocation occurs at the lower attachments of the tendon; therefore, you should distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the intact one, because among these differences you will find various manifestations. And you should touch the head of the muscle with a concave surface and on the tendon below the muscle head, where it appears like a knot, and the patient is unable to reduce their hand to their elbow, nor can they move it in any way.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the muscle is dislocated in the foot or ankle, you should look for clear signs of damage, and it should not be hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	With this type of dislocation, a relatively easy reduction can be performed when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction process is for the practitioner to lift their hand above the affected area; then they place their thumbs below the tendon and lift the joint upward with strength towards its location, while the practitioner lifts their hand and extends it. Then they press down on the tendon, allowing it to return to its proper position more easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If, as we have said, the dislocation does not return on its own from its initial occurrence, then, after several days, it is necessary for the patient to be bathed in hot water and administered a poultice that softens and cleanses like if it were made from chamomile, fennel, and marshmallow in water, and this should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then the patient should be placed on their back and held in place with linen that is neither too loose nor too tight, and the doctor should place his hand on top of it, lifting the muscle upwards and pulling the patient's hand so that it does not slip out of position, and another assistant should hold the patient's head, ensuring that it does not slip out of position as well, for it may quickly return to its original location.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want to carry out this method, bring a man who is taller than the patient, stand next to that side, and insert your muscle between the patient's thighs and lift their thigh towards the chest so that the patient is suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient's hand from their hips.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is lightweight, then it is necessary for something or someone to be suspended in order to weigh them down, as the dislocation may quickly return.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	It is also reduced in this manner: place a long pole on the ground with its head shaped like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and position it next to the patient; then sit the patient on top of the pole so that they are standing according to the length of the pole, and extend their arm from one side towards the other, while extending the other limb with strength from the opposite side, as the joint returns quickly to its original location.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If the reduction is difficult due to all the reasons mentioned earlier, then use this remedy: take a pole whose length is two forearms and width four fingers, and reduce its thickness in the region of the thigh according to this shape:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Place leather straps around the round head of the pole so that it does not touch the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Position the thigh of the patient next to the pole and extend the arm or arms over the pole towards the opposite side, lash the pole to the assistants and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Position the arms on a ladder of steps according to its width, and extend the hand towards the opposite side, while suspending the other limb from the other side, as the joint will quickly return to its original position.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	Once the instrument is complete according to any method that is possible for you, then it is necessary to position the thigh covered with linen of an appropriate size; and apply a plaster prepared from powdered chalk and glue over the entire muscle so that it is wrapped around it, and tighten the thigh with sufficient pressure; the linen should be wrapped over the plaster, and the hand should be attached to the neck and left loose, and the hand should not move for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	It is necessary to restrict the food of the patient for a short period until the member is comfortable, as it is easier for healing in this manner.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And it is appropriate to give more food after seven or five days, and exercise movement; therefore, if it remains firm without being softened, then it has healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated for more than several days due to moisture or some other cause, then it is necessary to administer a cauterization with three cuts, as was discussed in the chapter on cauterizations.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If all of the above is done and after seven days the linen wrap and joint are not healed, and the plaster and tightening have been removed several times without healing, and the muscle cap and nerves are infiltrated or extended or softened, then you should know that the joint will never be properly set.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The displacement of that which is dislocated, you must reduce it by applying pressure and extending it with your hands until it returns to its place.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Administer the other bandage (or splint), and care for it until it heals.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If there is grave delay in healing and sluggishness in the movement of the member, then the patient should use warm, observed baths until that gravity is alleviated and it returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and tends to return with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, but especially in front and behind, and a dislocation of it is not disguised because it is felt when moving or touching it according to which figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder correctly, that is clearly evident because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch the muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is necessary to catch it and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible, because if you come upon a dislocation with an abscess, it makes the reduction difficult, and a long time will not heal completely; and especially when it is at the back, for all other types of dislocations are worse and more painful, and many observed baths may bring death to that one.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it should be extended with two hands, and the arm should be expanded, and the doctor's hands should be on the shoulder and below it, and he should push the joint with the fingers of his hands or with the edge of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is at the front, it should be returned as follows: bend the arm with your hand, striking the shoulder with the edge of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then you should administer strong extension and movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two servants extend the arm, and another two must hold it so that it does not be remounted during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And turn the arm completely around, because it is wrapped in long cloth wound around its hand or linen.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil to help in the lubricity of the joint and facilitate reduction; then push the joint forcefully until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And the reduction of it should be paused on a plaster that has astringency and exudation with honey album, and it should be strengthened with bandaging downwards, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And it should be dislocated; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen the bandage from it and leave it alone.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strengthened, you repeat the plaster and bandage, leaving it for several days until it is strengthened; then loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if there is grave delay in reducing the joint, and its position is moving, then you administer humectation in baths and subtle friction, and compression, until it is alleviated; or place a splint on the joint with greasy motion; and tie it, and leave it over the bones for a day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And remove that one, and put it in bath; when it subsides, you scour the joint with tempered friction, and place a splint on it with greasy motion once, twice, and thrice,
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already reached the intestine through the anus, so it is necessary to wait for it to harden.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, place a cow's wet and scalded hoof over the wound, and press it down; and do that several times, because it is moist and reduces its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of wrist dislocation, that is, the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The wrist of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation of it is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints; however, speed in reducing it at the time it is dislocated is necessary, before the location becomes abscessed or an abscess occurs.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation of it is that you place the patient's hand on a table and the servant extends the arm, and places his hand or palm on the edge of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is necessary to consider whether the palm has been left on the abdomen of the hand, in which case you place the patient's hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceded by them, then the position of the hand should be placed internally on the table, so that the doctor's hand encloses the edge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns soon, that's good; but if not, you must apply a plaster to the abscess and leave it; do not repeat this, for otherwise, it will not tolerate nor endure the reduction of it until several days have passed.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint returns in its crookedness; and you do not notice any cause for the patient, but his hand is softened and cannot tighten anything; then know that the nerves are broken or crushed, and do not attempt to straighten it unless it is strongly cauterized near the injury site and provide some means to strengthen it.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	But when the pain returns, you should stop using the plaster that we recommended and leave it alone for 10 days to heal and strengthen itself. Then you should loosen and leave it alone, and exercise the affected area.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement is obstructed and it happens to be serious, you should soothe it with warm water and massage for several days until it improves.
Capitol .xxix.	Capital XXIX. (I couldn't translate the line as there's no text provided after "Capitol .")
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Fingers can be partially or completely dislocated at any joint.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When a finger is dislocated at the back of the palm or the front of the joint, you should compress it with your thumbs and gently push it back into place until it returns to its original position.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Hold the finger's head steady and suspend the dislocated part with your hand for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then gradually stretch it out until it is straightened in that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When night comes, release it according to the narrative, and do not stop releasing or moving it during the day, but at night you should exercise it gently, and follow this process for several days until it becomes strong again.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	If the finger is dislocated at the wrist joint, you should apply the same method as previously described, and carry out the first operation on it until it heals.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And do the same when the finger is dislocated at other joints.
Capitol .xxx.	Capital XXX. (I couldn't translate the line as there's no text provided after "Capitol .")
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of spine vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the vertebrae in the spine or neck, and there are broken vertebrae at that location, do not attempt to treat it, as death is imminent for the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	A sign of this is that the patient's excretions are outside of his control and cannot be retained; several days pass with some parts of his body or one or both legs, or an arm becoming soft, or one vertebra is dislocated and several days later the dislocation occurs in four different places.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it has been dislocated to the rear joints, and it is called luxation.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the treatment of it is to consider whether the luxation occurs due to weakness, in which case there is no cure or healing of the entire limb.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	However, in cases of luxation caused by trauma or striking objects similar to these, the Ancients described long discourses on treatment methods, but I will shorten it and explain it briefly with fewer words for better understanding, using instruments that I will show you and describe here.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	In gout that occurs near the foot, it is neither a wound nor healing of such; and similarly in one that occurs twice.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	Here's the translation:
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And the patient is to be extended on his bed so that he is near the wall, and the foot should be elevated with cushions to prevent swelling there.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then a straight stick should be placed and fixed into the ground at the foot's end near the head, and another at the other end of the foot to lift it up.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister should hold the stick, not fixed in a hole; and another minister should hold the other one accordingly.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then wrap the patient's head with a cloth or a soft material and tickle him gently until he falls asleep. Extend the end of the ligament to the stick, which should be at his head, and tie it there; extend the other ligament over his buttocks, under his arms, and support his chest; then adjust all the ligaments and tie them to the other stick, which should be at his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Then the minister extends each ligament to the appropriate part of the stick and neither should the two sticks and their ligaments at their respective ends be removed, but rather they should not be fixed like I said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor places his hands on the spine with strength until it returns to its original position or he places something heavy over it (such as a table) and then adjusts his feet under the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is about three yards and carve a hole in the wall near the patient, into which you insert the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then place the table's edge on the spine and the doctor places his feet at the other end, squeezing it tightly until the spine is compressed and returns to its original position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, turn the head of the patient towards you; and you should be on your knees at the foot of the bed, with two sticks whose length is one arm each, and both ends of the sticks are at the foot of the bed as well, and there should be a space between each stick that is the width of a hand. Then make a hole in each stick so that it can move freely, and ensure they are both firmly planted on the ground to prevent them from moving.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And make a circular stick that goes through both holes of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of this (circular) stick there is a hole where another stick can be inserted, whose length is one hand's width and rotates around it. The same applies to the other two sticks.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then tighten the ligaments that you have tied around the patient's foot at the appropriate location (the stick at his head), and the ligaments that you have tied around his thighs at the appropriate location (the circular stick at his feet).
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And there should be one turner (a person who twists the body) at each end, and the doctor should manipulate the spine as described earlier.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	Here is the form of the turner (device):
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	After the spine has been returned to its original position and the wound is closed, you should apply cold compresses with egg whites and wool, and then place a board of three fingers' width (or slightly more) on the affected area and the area of the spine. The length of the board should be equal to the size of the gout (the affected area), and it should cover the entire spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	Then tie the ligament that we mentioned earlier and feed the patient with a subtle nourishment until he is cured.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there is any residual pain or swelling in the affected area after recovery, then medications that soften and cool should be administered for a long time, as we have recommended; and already plaster (or liniment) has been applied to that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes the end of the spine in the back happens to dislocate due to that displacement; and that bone is known for being difficult to reset because it has already begun to protrude, so it should not be forced with this medicine, as it could lead to death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of dislocated hips.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the pelvis do not slip out only in dislocation but rather they occur in minor displacement and hollowing, which is more common in other joints.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The hip joint is dislocated in four ways: either it is displaced internally, externally, anteriorly or posteriorly.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And moreover, it is usually displaced internally, and less frequently, in front or behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of internal dislocation is that when you align the healthy hip with the diseased one, the healthy bone is longer and its end more prominent than the diseased, and the diseased cannot bend its leg, therefore it should be pulled, and the area where it is pulled should be marked with a cautery mark so that the head of the dislocated joint has been reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of external dislocation is that the symptoms of it are contrary to this one (internal dislocation).
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of anterior dislocation is that the hip bone expands in accordance with its condition, but there is pain at the front without bending it, and if pressure is applied to move it forward, it cannot do so, and the urine retains and the opening is marked, and the patient should walk on their heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of posterior dislocation is that the front does not expand or bend, and the hip bone is shorter than the other, and the opening is softened, and the head of the dislocated joint should be in that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and long-standing, in which case it has become fixed and you administer its reduction according to its position, and therefore it is not in the treatment of everything; and hence, it should not be forced.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in the case of a recent dislocation, and one of the four species of dislocation, you must then take care to turn the joint and stretch it internally and externally on both sides, turning it to the right and left, as it will return naturally without needing other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this way, you must then prepare a strong medication and stretch the hip bone from below or above, or with an iron strap on the surface of the bone; another servant should extend their hand above in such a way that they place their hands deeper into the joint; and another should apply strong pressure with the iron lever on the side of the dislocated joint, while another servant holds the end of the iron strap.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	The extension should be from the hip to the ankle or from the front of the hip to the area of the collarbone, or from the back to the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	The extension should be in one movement so that the patient is lifted from the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is common to all four species (types).
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns with what has been said, it will be good; otherwise, it is necessary for all species (types) to perform what we have described for their own treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the dislocated joint, if it is internally displaced, the patient should be reclined on their side; and place the straps on the side of the dislocated joint in the area between the head of the dislocated joint and the lower part to which the leg is pulled; and then pull the strap above the ankle area to the uppermost part of the collarbone.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another strong servant should grab the patient's arms, and firmly hold the large side of the diseased joint and extend it outwards with great force, as it will return to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This specimen is for light healing of pus, by which this member is reduced more than other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If the patient is excused and refuses treatment with this specimen of healing, then it is necessary to tie both feet of the patient tightly and firmly, lightly, on top of both soles and both ankles.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Let the length of each one be four fingers, and let the patient's bandage be extended more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then let the patient be suspended over the post and raised as much as possible, and let the length from the ground be two armspans.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong young man to chop off the head of the boil, and suspend another young man over the patient, and let the third young man push against the boil with force, as the joint will return to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the case of self-reduction, when there is a dislocation outside the part, it is necessary for the patient to push against the ground as recommended in the treatment with hot poultices; and tighten the bandage firmly on the patient's cavity itself and on the legs.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Then two posts are placed, one at the feet and another at the head; and let two more posts be adjusted to the height of the pole that is planted on which wet cloths are wrapped around it, so that the patient is not harmed by the post being between his legs, and thus the extension at the sides should not be drawn in.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Each assistant extends to their part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So, if he refuses to turn over, it will be very good; otherwise, press down on him carefully and thus as recommended in the treatment by the poultices for that guidance.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But it is necessary that the patient pushes against the bars of his bed.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the front side, it is necessary that the cavity be slightly extended, and as described in this narrative on the pole; and the doctor places his right palm on the patient's groin, and with the other hand, he presses against the patient's groin, and with that pressure, he extends the cavity on the front side to the front hip.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the rear side, it is not necessary for the patient to be extended on the back side and raised above the ground; instead, it is necessary to press down on a hard surface, as is also done if the ankle is dislocated on the front side, as described in the treatment of the ankle on two pillows; and it should be placed face-down and the bandages are extended, as mentioned earlier, there will be no benefit.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to administer a compression with a board on the location of the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Thus, since the reduction is complex, as you know from the sign of the reduction of that member, which is not hidden from you, and you extend both sides of the patient's cavity, and when you see them tightened and the patient extends their cavity without objection, then you will know that the member has returned to its proper place — and then you adjust two cushions and apply paste and hold with bandages so that the ankle is not damaged on any side; and let the patient rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then unbind and remove the paste and compare the two cavities.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see them tightened in the proper way, then you will know that the dislocation has been healed, and at that point let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of swelling or inflammation, then you return and apply paste to it, hold it as before, and let it rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then unbind that one, and let it walk slowly on each side for several days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Treatise on the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The ankle can be dislocated in three ways, namely, it is dislocated outside, inside, more to the front than the rear; and it is not dislocated at the front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of the ankle dislocation is to command the patient to press their cavity against something; then you will know that the ankle is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all types of ankle dislocation is that you press the patient's chest straight, so that he extends his cavity if possible; and hold your two hands to the front side of the ankle, and place the foot of the patient between your feet; and have another assistant hold the ankle with their palms on it, and retain them firmly on the ankle with your fingers, and another servant extend their foot into it until the ankle returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of reduction is that the patient's cavity adheres to the chest without effort or pain.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then you apply paste to it and have them press their cavity against the chest, and hold them there with bandages for three or four days; then unbind them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not let the patient walk for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction (of the hernia or intestine) is not possible for you, then administer strong traction on the bandages mentioned in the treatment of hernia's preliminary narrative.
Capitol .xxxiii.	This line indicates that we are moving onto Chapter 33 of the treatise. It's customary to number chapters in Roman numerals (I, II, III, IV, V, etc.) but this text uses Arabic numerals instead (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.). So, this line means "Chapter 33."
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	This sentence translates to: On the treatment of ankle dislocation. The text is discussing a specific medical issue related to the ankle joint (dislocatio del talo).
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle joint is sometimes reduced through minor manipulation and other times it is dislocated due to complete displacement. Dislocation of the joint can occur inside or outside the ligaments (fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo).
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of joint dislocation is that the ankle swells, resulting from the displacement at the site of the dislocation.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for reducing the dislocation is simple traction, performed with ease and the joint should be guided back into its original position (engualhat entro que retorne).
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	However, in the treatment of a complete dislocation, it is necessary to immobilize the patient correctly and have a strong and capable assistant behind the patient at the correct location (cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu).
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then position yourself with your right hand on the patient's heel (de la pus sobirana part) and your left hand above the ankle (de la part pus dejos del pe) in the location of the cavity (en le loc de la cavilha).
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand (E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tuya mano derecha), and push with your left hand for two counts, extending it (e aprop am la sinistra por dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra); and push the leg of the foot against the bed with your right hand (empelleys le pietz del pe am la mano derecha sobre la cama sin trabajo).
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Do this for two counts as previously stated. This line indicates that the actions mentioned in the previous sentence (pulling, pushing, and pushing against the bed) should be performed twice, for a total of four movements. It appears that these movements are part of the process to reduce or reposition the dislocated ankle joint.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then push the leg of the foot against the bed on the third count, and you should be at the ankle (cavilha). This line indicates that after performing the initial pulling, pushing, and pushing against the bed for two counts as instructed earlier, the medical practitioner should push the patient's leg against the bed one more time on the third count. The purpose of this action is to maintain the position of the ankle during the reduction or repositioning process. It also ensures that the medical practitioner is in the correct location (at the ankle) for the following steps.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If the joint returns to its original position during this method (una veguada or in two counts), that's good; otherwise, continue with the procedure as the dislocation may return. This passage suggests that if the dislocated ankle joint is successfully reduced or repositioned during the described actions (pulling, pushing, and pushing against the bed), then the process can be stopped. However, if the dislocation does not appear to have been corrected, the medical practitioner should continue with the procedure as it may still need further manipulation to achieve proper alignment. The text emphasizes the importance of monitoring the joint's progress during this process and being prepared for potential complications or recurrences of the dislocation.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	However, if reduction (remocio) of the joint is not possible due to factors mentioned earlier, lay the patient on their back on a firm surface (Jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra), and place a small pillow (paysel mot) under their buttocks. Then position a box or case between their legs so they are securely held in place, and wrap them loosely with cloth to avoid causing discomfort to the patient (e tu ya has envolopat sobre lu drap para que no le moleste al malade). This passage offers an alternative approach when reduction of the dislocated joint is not possible. In this case, the patient is placed on their back, and a small pillow or cushion is placed under their buttocks for support. A box or case is positioned between the patient's legs to hold them in place, while loosely wrapping them with cloth (drap) ensures their comfort during this immobilization period. It appears that this positioning helps to stabilize the joint and may potentially allow it to heal without further manipulation.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	The assistant should hold the patient's legs, and another assistant should extend the foot with their hands or a rope that lies on top of the neck of the foot (am liament que lie sobre le col del pe). Each assistant should then extend their corresponding part (contrastente extencio del sieu par) against the extension of the patient's leg, and the pillow should remain between the patient's legs to prevent the patient's body from being pulled apart at the displacement site (per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio).
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	The physician should then carefully align the dislocation using their hands (enguala la dislocacion am las suyas manos), and another assistant should hold the healthy limb at the site of displacement to facilitate the reduction (otro ministro tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacion retorna am la facilidad).
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so, if the dislocation returns and is declared to be corrected, you should apply a plaster (emplastre) and tighten it using strong bandages (extrenha aquella am liamentz fortmente), and then bind the foot with bandages to the bed (ligua le pe am liament a la cama).
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	You must be careful or protect the nerves that are located at the back of the heel, so that the ligaments on top of it are not too tight and press on it forcefully.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Leave it like this for two or three days, and if the ligament is softened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Loosen it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if the patient must walk in that space, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be worsened and become corrupted, so this should not be allowed to receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If an abscess forms cauterized, then it is necessary that you administer the medicine in the area where the previous narrative mentioned it, at another location for treatment and dressing, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes on the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	The dislocated one should be bound loosely without much extension; and that which is not difficult can be moved easily.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, then it should be necessary for the patient to rest their foot on a flat surface such as the ground or table, and stay like someone walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then you should stand on one foot and rest the other on something that supports the joints, then walk with it as usual until it returns, and watch to make sure that it is still bound and does not appear in the prominent area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then rest the belly of the foot on a table that supports the entire foot with two legs, and strengthen it with a suitable structure for three days; then loosen it and allow it to rest from walking for several days until it is strengthened and recovery is ensured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocation that are caused by wounds, fractures or any combination.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occur, and you proceed with the treatment and restoration of it, many times death occurs.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And therefore it is not necessary to proceed with the treatment of it presumptuously, but rather someone who is wise in the art, long experienced, merciful and compassionate, should be slow, neither hasty nor presumptuous; and use medicines that only cure abscesses cauterized at first, and allow the patient to divine judgment, rather than to the one for whom you hope salvation from destruction, or relief from illness, and where there is some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore it is best to quickly perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before an abscess forms cauterized.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And if the limb returns as we wish, then administer a regimen that will cure an abscess cauterized and heal the wound with what is appropriate for drying up the exudates.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and there are separated fragments in the bone, then perform the setting of them, and do what has been said about simple illnesses that follow in their respective locations.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And be careful and avoid what is appropriate in the path of fear as has been described in my preaching; for that is better for you to your Creator, and more persistent to your glory, and more healthful to your true body at your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly in whose praise God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
