Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	 Thus begin the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	 So, sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the knowledge of medicine, by its completion one reaches its end, and through its explanations and descriptions, it has become clear to me that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is a part of the operation by hand, thus it is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	 For the operation by hand has been neglected in our region and in our time, to such an extent that it is almost entirely lost, and its traces have disappeared; only a few small descriptions remain in the books of the Ancients, which have changed greatly and have come to errors and confusion, until their meanings are closed off and the power and art of them are weakened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	 And it has seemed to me that I should revive it with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of explanation and description and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the cautery tools and the other instruments of the work as will be added by the explanation, and for its preparation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	 But the reason why a good craftsman with his hand is not found in this our time is that the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary for its practitioner to be well-exercised in the science of anatomy, which includes knowledge of the arrangement of the members and their forms, their connections and separations; and he must have knowledge of the bones, nerves and ligaments, and their number, and their function; and of the pulsating veins and the still ones, and their exit points.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	 And for this reason Ipocrates says that with a name it is nothing, but in action it is little, and mostly in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	 But we have already said that about him in the beginning of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable in what we have said about anatomy will not be able to avoid making errors which will cause the death of men, as I have seen happen many times. For some are educated in this science and yet cast it aside without knowledge or experimentation.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	 Because I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor incise a scrofulous abscess on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed until the woman died in his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	 And I saw another doctor who tried to remove a stone from a man whose condition had worsened, and the stone was large, and he came to him and removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that on the third day that man died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	 And I had been called to remove it, and upon seeing the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I realized that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	 And I saw another doctor who received payment of one thousand ducats from our land for surgery, and he came across a black eunuch who had a broken leg; the doctor, in his ignorance, removed the fracture from the wound using cushions and splints with great strength, but did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	 Then he released him according to his desires, and then bound him up again, and then left him alone for some days and ordered us to release the bandages; and it was so bad that the thigh and the foot were both infected, and it came to a fatal end.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	 And I was called to him, and I prepared to release the bandages, and after some time, he gained peace and his pains subsided.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	 However, the corruption had already taken hold in the member, so it could not be stopped, and the corruption continued to spread in the member until the patient died.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	 And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after a few days, to the point that the evil of it spread throughout his body.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	 The reason for this is that the cancerous abscess is full of melancholic humors, so it is not necessary to pierce it completely with iron, but rather it should be done in a member that can bear it, and then let it be drained.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	 And for this reason, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two paths: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is a work associated with great danger in its conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	 And I have already written about this in all parts of this book where there is an operation that involves error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against this and leave it aside, so that the pages do not find a way to speak and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	 And therefore, take up your arms with care and under the protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	 And use the best method by the grace of God for healing and praiseworthy success, and avoid terrible diseases with difficult cures. Keep your arms away from what frightens you, so that failure in your faith and your name does not escape you: for it is more beneficial to your glory, both now and forever after, to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	 In fact, Gualia has already discussed some of this in his sections on medicines.
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	 "Do not treat bad diseases, so that you are not called bad doctors.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	 And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	  Here begins the division of the book, and first is the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	 The first chapter is ordered about the head, particularly the feet, concerning the forms of instruments and the irons of the cautery, and what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	 The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The second chapter is on incisions and punctures, and on cupping glasses, and on wounds, and on the extraction of arrows and similar things, all categorized and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	 Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The third chapter is on setting bones and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; this chapter is ordered concerning the feet, and the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	 On cautery with fire and sharp medicine, and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	 With this begins the treatise on the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	 I must speak about the qualities of the helpers for that cautery and its hindrances, and in what condition caution should be taken when performing cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	 Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of helpers for cautery and its hindrances is long and protracted, subtle by science, and hidden in secrecy; and many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, and to me only a little of their words suffices, fearing prolixity. ︎
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	 And so I say that you should apply cautery universally to every condition, whether it has matter or not, with the exception of two conditions that are cold without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	 In a cold and dry condition with matter, it will be disagreed upon; for some say that cautery is beneficial for that, while others say the opposite of that, namely that cautery is not suitable in an illness which is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is hot and dry, and it is inconvenient that a cold and dry illness with moisture, which is hot and dry, should be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	 And I disagree with those who say the opposite of that, that through cautery every cold and dry illness that comes upon the bodies of men is benefited, because when you compare the body of a man and its moisture to the quality of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	 And I say by the words of that one, that experience has already revealed this to me many times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	 Nevertheless, it is not necessary that this be repeated to one who has already been proven and exercised in the chapter on cautery through recent practice, and who knows the diversity of human conditions and the dispositions of illnesses within them, and their causes, and their accidents, and the duration of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	 In other conditions, there is no need to fear, especially in cases of cold and moist diseases, for all doctors agree on this matter, and they are not uncertain about treating them with a cautery in those cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	 And know, sons, that the secret of treatment by cautery with fire and its goodness is also discussed in cautery with medication, because fire is simple, and its action only reaches the member being cauterized and does not harm the neighboring member except for a small damage.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	 But the action of medication burns also reaches the members neighboring it, and quickly brings about difficult healing in the ailing member and quickly increases.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	 But the fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this except that it causes superfluousness. And it is known to us through experiment and long study of the art concerning the truth of causes; and because of this I am excused from the length of the speech. And if it were not that it has not been read in my book, I would have here hidden for you with fire a secret, and the quality of its operation in bodies and its expulsion by which it drives out diseases, demonstrated by philosophical discourse, which would have sharpened your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	 And know, sons, that they disagree on the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and pause at the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	 And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm caused by accidental weather conditions is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn out with cautery. And especially if the cautery is for painful or necessary pains, fissures and fistulas, which do not tolerate delay, lest it be feared that something worse may come from them than a small harm caused by the weather.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	 And do not let this enter your minds, o sons, for only the common people and foolish doctors believe this. Therefore, at that illness which is cured by cautery there is always a return, and they consider this consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	 And the reason is not as they think because of this, for cautery is only used in places where medicine alters the complexion and dries up the humidity which are the cause of the pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	 But, however, cautery surpasses medicine in terms of speed of action and power of its operation, as well as the greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	 And it is possible that his illness may return at some point in time, depending on the complexion of the patient and the location of his illness, and his strength, as well as what is prepared in his body from the accumulation of excesses within him, and what has come to him from his diet and similar causes; unless the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness with few excesses and humidity, such as a toothache for pain and similar things. It is possible that in this case there will be no return of that pain, but it happens rarely. 》
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	 And the common saying is that cautery is the last resort in medicine, and this is a true statement, not because I understand it as such, but because I believe that there is no cure that benefits with medicine or any other means except cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	 And the reason is contrary to this; and the intention that cautery is the last resort in medicine is only when administering certain methods of treatment for some diseases, and those medicines do not work, and finally at the end of the cause, one administers cautery, and it proves effective then.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	 And therefore it is clear that cautery is the last resort in medicine, not according to the intention which I understand from the common people and many foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	 And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this only because of the equality of gold and the excellence of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	 And they said that the site of cautery does not burn, as if this were absolutely true, for I have already seen and found that this is not the case except in certain bodies without others, and cauterizing with it is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not declared to you, for it becomes ignited according to the amount you want by the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive a burn. And if you place the fire on it, the gold melts from the heat, and some thin sheets fall into the fire because of the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	 "And for this purpose, a cautery with iron should be used, because it is lighter and more precise for the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	 "And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have arranged those from the head down to the feet, so that I can provide the inquirer with what he wants.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	 "On cautery for cold- and dampness-induced headache pain.
Le capitol primier.	 The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	 "This cautery addresses the humidity and cold that cause these two accidents, which are two causes of a condition called corissa, characterized by an abundance of flux in the head, from the temples to the ears, as well as excessive sleepiness, toothache, sore throat, and universally any illness caused by cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar conditions.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	 "The method for this cautery is as follows: first, instruct the patient to be evacuated with a cathartic medicine that cleanses the head, for three or four nights, according to the nature of the illness, the age of the patient, and their usual habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	 "And then instruct him to shave his head with a razor, and then have that person sit between your hands on a bench, and let him place his feet on the ground.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	 And then place the tip of your palm near the nostrils, on the tip of the nose between its wings.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	 But nevertheless, when your finger has reached the middle of the nose, mark that spot with a needle, and then ignite the pointed cautery made from olive wood like this:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	 And then place that [cautery] on the marked spot, allowing it to descend, while you hold your hand tightly and turn that [cautery].
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	 And then lightly lift your hand and observe the spot, and if you see any amount of bone exposed, even as small as a grain of barley, then raise your hand. If not, return your hand with that iron, or another like it, until you see what I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	 And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the spot and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	 And then place on it a piece of cloth soaked in vinegar and leave it on until the scab of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat the spot with tetrapharmacon ointment until it heals.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	 And they say that the longer the wound remains open, the better the arm heals, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	 E dixerunt alguns d'ells que hauria de ser cauteritzada la columna vertebral entre els ossos, i que s'hauria de mantenir el cauteri fins que es cicatritzi alguna part de l'estructura de l'os.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	 And immediately scrape away that which is adjacent to the bone, and then cure it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	 And others say that with the cautery you should reach deep until it strongly presses on the bone and breaks it, and this is the method of small incision.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	 And they believe that from that place the vapors of the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	 And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is healed.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	 But I have not seen these two types of cautery in everything, but only in some men out of fear; and leave that one alone, for it is better to be safe than sorry, because the head is weakened by the loss of its continuity, just as we have shown in other members, especially when the patient's head is of a frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	 And the first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; and with that one should proceed and work safely.
Capitol segon.	 Chapter Two.
Del cauteri del cap.	 On Cauterizing the Head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	 When there is chronic and prolonged pain throughout the entire head in the patient, and they have used powders, cupping glasses, head purges, plasters, helmets, caps, bonnets, and similar remedies, especially if they have already been cauterized with a cautery that does not help them at all, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution in its nature; it is not frail but finds great benefit, then cauterize that one again with another cautery after the first one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	 And then cauterize that area on the crown of his head with a cautery until the blood vessel is severed.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	 Cut the blood vessel and expose the bone to the extent we have described, then cauterize that area with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called "vas," which is where the vein is located.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	 And ease your hand in this, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find great pain from this, different from the pain of all other head cauteries.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	 And I say this because the cautery used for the crown of the head and the occiput should be finer than that used for the middle of the head; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	 Headaches.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	 On the Cautery for Recent Migraine
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	 When there is severe pain on the top of the head or when pain spreads to the eye, it should be evacuated with purifying medicines and other treatments should be administered as I have mentioned in the sections on diseases; if this does not help, then cauterization can be done in two ways: either cauterization with a sharp burning instrument or with iron. ︎
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	 "However, with a pointed cautery made from copper, you should take a piece of wool, clean it and bind the patient's extremities with it from both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	 "Then make an incision in the painful area of the temple with a sharp lancet, inserting it until it reaches the bone, but not too deep.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	 "Then apply pressure to the patient with a compress for about three hours; then remove it and apply wool, leaving the wound open for two or three days, and then place a cold compress on the area until the swelling subsides.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 "Then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	 "And if you wish, do this with some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the twelve treatises on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "But if you want to perform cauterization with iron according to this method, here is the shape of the cautery: 
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	 "It is called a 'nail iron,' because the tip of it is shaped like a nail with some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small elevation.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	 "Then place it on the painful area and hold your hand — to prevent the iron from burning too much — and turn the iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	 And if the amount of him that is burnt by the tip of the cautery is such that it covers most of him, raise your hand to ensure that the artery underneath is not burnt, so that blood flow is not disrupted.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And then you should place a cloth in salt water and put it on the area, leaving it for three days; then place a soft cloth with a border around it, and then treat it with ointment until it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	 And if you see, cauterize with the tip of the scalpel as with a cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery in this particular unnamed area.
Capitol quart.	 Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	 On Cauterization of Ancient Migraine.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	 When you treat a migraine with the previously mentioned remedies, as well as those listed under headaches, and the treatment is not effective, and sometimes due to the severity of the illness, what was said about the first cautery with medicine or cautery with fire is not enough. Then it is necessary for you to heat the scalpel until it is white-hot, because you signify on the area of the pain with a line the length of which is most of the finger, or however long that may be; and place your hand once and strongly so that you do not cut the artery and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	 This text appears to be discussing the importance of preventing jaw issues that can arise from excessive chewing or jaw locking, as well as protecting against spasms. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	 And if it is about the caution and care of blood flow from the artery that bursts, because in its rupture there is fear, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not skilled or experienced; and leave the operation to someone who has experience at first.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	 And I will recall the treatment for an accidental blood flow from the artery according to its method, in its place within this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 And if this illness does not subside with this cautery and the body of the patient is tolerable, cauterize in the middle part of the head as we have described, and treat the wound until it heals.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	 And if you wish, administer the cautery as we said in the chapter on stretching of the artery with a cautery having two edges, and this is a better and more effective cauterization.
Capitol .v.	 Chapter .5
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	 On cauterization for ear pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When ear pain occurs due to cold and is treated with purgative medicines and other treatments as mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply the cautery, which is called "puncture," and this is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	 And then prick near the joint, and let it be led around the entire ear in such a way that a wheel is turned, or on the edge of each lobe if the pain is in one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	 And with the cautery at the root of the ear, prick little by little until you feel the spot with your finger.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	 And if the cautery points are on the whole ear, and you cut it off, and then cure the spots until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	 Chapter VI
De cauterizacio de turtura.	 On the cauterization of a hernia (turtura is an old term for hernia).
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	 A hernia that is cured by cauterization is only of the species that come through phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	 Avoid cauterizing the type that comes from dryness or nerve spasm.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	 When you treat that type of hernia with cups, purgatives, and gargles, and your treatment is not successful, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	 And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected area, because softening only occurs in the area that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	 And the manner of cauterization is that you cauterize with the cautery on the right side of the highest point of the ear, slightly above the horn of the head, and in the temple another one, whose length should be according to the length of this finger, and place your hand with the cautery until it has burned half the amount of the thickness of a reed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	 And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of the cutler, whose shape is as follows:
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	 But, however, it should be more subtle than that one, somewhat like a wasp; and it is necessary that the blade in place of excess thickness should be a little thinner.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for the area with water that has been processed beforehand until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	 Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	 On cauterizing ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	 When apoplexy is old and you treat it with the water we mentioned and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize with four cauteries: on all the corners of their head; and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	 And the method of using the cautery is done as mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	 And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and then it should be treated with warm water.
Capitol .viii.	 Chapter VIII
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	 About cauterizing for forgetfulness done by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	 Therefore, at the beginning, give the patient large cups and pills to cleanse him.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	 Then shave the head of the patient completely and place on his crown an ointment of cedar, as described in the treatise on ointments.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	 And do this several times, because that is the method of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	 And do this according to the same order that I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	 And thus if he is cured by these means; and if not, then make three cauteries on the rear part of his head, which should descend from the highest part of the head to the lowest part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	 And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then treat the cauterized area with warm water.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	 But if there is an increase and the patient tolerates it, then make a cautery in the middle of the head; and if there is greater increase, then cauterize on both temples.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	 "Then care for that person who is sick; and let the cautery be olive oil, as described earlier.
Capitol .ix.	 "Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	 "On the Cauterization of Parasites and the Softening of the Entire Body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	 "Ensure that you process the head for modification with jars and water as mentioned; then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all the corners of the head, and with a cautery on the back of the head, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	 "And if it is necessary in the illness of softening the body due to excessive heat and the illness is strong, then cauterize with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and then cauterize until it becomes red from his neck down, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	 "Then care for that person who is sick, and let this be an olive oil cautery.
Capitol .x.	 "Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	 "On the Cauterization of Epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	 "An epileptic is not cauterized unless their epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	 And so it is necessary to modify the brain of the patient at its beginning with years and with the other treatment which we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and is tolerating the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	 And if the patient is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer gargles and chewables that serve to cleanse, for several days before that, with the improvement of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	 Then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on the back of the head, and above each corner of the head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	 And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize with the aforementioned cauteries, having first paralyzed and softened the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	 And let the cautery be olive-sized, as previously stated.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	 But if the patient is a child, then place a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	 On the Cauterization of Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	 When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and thick flame, then cauterize it with the cauteries that we have mentioned, having first paralyzed (it).
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	 And if the cause of melancholy is an excess declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them water that purifies their brain according to what has been said earlier in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	 And then shave the patient's head, and then make a proper tourniquet from it around the circle (of the head), and then place that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	 And the patient should be sitting comfortably, and should be held by all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	 Then apply a liniment; and it is more worthy to use ancient oil of sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	 And heat that (liniment) over the fire for a temperate warmth according to measure, which the said patient endures when it is most in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	 Then pour that into the middle of his head on the circle, and let it seep in until he is soaked.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	 And do this with the patient every day for one week, along with his other good regimen until he is healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that area making small points according to his size, as long as you have a hand with an arranged cautery: this is the type of cautery which moistens the brain equally. 😊
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	 And then place that bandage soaked in vinegar or gray linen on it.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter XII
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	 On the Cauterization of Water Descending into the Ear
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	 When you have recognized the onset of water in the ear by the signs that I mentioned in the division, begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses their head, and keep them from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	 And make them sweat in a bath of warm water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	 Then instruct the patient to shave their head, and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head; then cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if the water flow starts in both ears, or only on one side if the water starts in one ear.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	 Make incisions with a cautery on all the veins and arteries that are under the cord, and let the cauteries be in that place as far as the length of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	 And be careful of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see any blood flow from the patient, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	 And I will come with wisdom about the removal of arteries and their excision, as well as the prevention of blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	 And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries very close together.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	 On the Cauterization of Old Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	 When tears from the eyes are old and persistent, traveling through the veins and arteries visible on the surface of the head, and it is confirmed that this is due to superfluous phlegmatic humors, then cauterize with a cautery as described in the chapter on water falling into the eyes, and also with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries in the neck below two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck below two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	 And if more is needed, then also cauterize along the entire edge of the eye's tail towards the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	 Chapter 14
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	 On the Cauterization of Nose Odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	 When you treat this condition with the water we mentioned in the division and your treatment is not effective, then prepare and give the patient to drink for three nights; and then shave his head, and cauterize him with a mid-sized cautery and an olive-sized cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	 And then cauterize that with a pointed cautery with two points above both eyebrows, just below the hairline slightly.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	 And be careful not to burn that area.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	 And this is how the pointed cautery looks like.
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter XV.  (Capítulo XV.)
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	 On the softening cautery of the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery like this lunar one; and this is its shape.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	 And if you cauterize it, do so on both eyebrows slightly with two points in all parts, and they should be long from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	 And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	 And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that one-third of the eyelid is burned.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	 On the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs have turned inward and punch the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	 When the hairs of the eye have turned inward to such an extent that they puncture the eye, cautioning is done in those cases in two ways, for it can be done with iron or with burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	 Sure, let's translate that sentence:
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	 Certainly! Let's translate the provided text line by line into English:
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	 And then place a cotton soaked in egg white or a paste of flour on the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	 Then ignite the cautery, which has this shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	 Then cauterize over the figure that you have marked, little by little, in visible spots, until the surface of the vein appears like a myrtle leaf, fully visible.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	 The sign of success of the surgical procedure is that you will see the eyelid of the wound already retracted and its hair raised towards the point of the wound.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	 Therefore, raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then place cotton with a border on it until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	 But if the hairs return for any reason and the eyelid is softened, then do the cautery on it again as you did the first time.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	 But if the hairs are still on the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural place and healed, so that the hairs do not touch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 Certainly! Let's translate the text line by line:
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	 Certainly! Let's translate this line by line:
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	 And place the medicine on the wound and press it gently until the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for the burning is in them like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	 And so, when the patient perceives that they have found burning, then remove the medicine and cover it with a clean cloth; once the burning has ceased, then replace the medicine and wash the wound with water; and then consider if you see the eyelid is already lifted as if it were washed by constricting with fire or incision, for then it is well; and if not, place more of the medicine on the area where the medicine has not been applied and do not neglect until your operation is completed and the wound is healed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	 And then place on him a bandage with a border until the swelling of the inflammation is removed, and then cure it with healing ointment or another until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	 And it is necessary for you, in your operation you must keep watch with diligent care that none of the medicine falls into the wound, and if after some days the eyelid becomes soft and any hair touches the wound, then repeat your medicine on that part of the eyelid which has become soft, and exactly as you did at the beginning, and then cover it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 "And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	 And know that men's heels are varied according to their size and smallness, and therefore your treatment is based on this.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	 "And the path of correctness will not be hidden from those who study this art.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	 "About cauterizing a fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	 "When you are treating a fistula with the water that we have mentioned in the division of illnesses, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to cauterize it in this manner: tell the patient to place their head on your shoulder, and have another assistant hold their head between your hands in such a way that it is not moved or shaken with their head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	 "And then place a piece of cotton wool soaked in egg white or chickpea flour on the patient's eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "And then heat the cautery, the form of which is this:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	 "which should be hollow, like the shape of a reed or a vulture feather, with one end being the cautery.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	 "And if you wish, it may also be inserted into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	 And if you wish, it may be treated in this manner.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	 But nevertheless, that which is hollow is better for the treatment.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	 Then press on the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	 And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	 Then place the cautery over it, which should be well-lit. Hold it with your healing hand a little above the cautery hole near the nose, so that your hand does not tremble or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery in the gray part of the wound and burn it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	 And thus, if at the beginning of your cautery it enters the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice more, if necessary; and leave it like this for three days, and then place a pad over that spot with a bandage and apply a drying ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	 But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then place a sharp, corrosive medicine over it until the bone is exposed and then scrape it according to what is appropriate in this chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	 There is another way to cauterize a fistula that some of the ancients first said: take care of the place of the fistula and open it up, and then place in that crack a very thin needle whose shape matches it; and pour into that the quantity of an ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand with the needle with good steadiness, so that the patient is not disturbed so that the molten lead does not enter the wound of that; and you should place over the wound of the patient a cotton pad infused in egg white or water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it through miraculous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	 And if the fistula is healed with the water we have mentioned for cauterization and treatment, it is good; otherwise, then it is necessary to administer a poultice from the nose and reduce the fistula to its proper place in the nasal cavity.
Capitol .xviii.	 Chapter XVIII
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	 About the cauterization of the cleft of the feet.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	 Many times these fissures occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	 Therefore, when you treat those fissures with the water we have mentioned in the divisions and your treatment does not work, then burn it with a small pointed cautery according to this form that follows:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	 And let its cavity be according to the delicacy of the knife (or blade).
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	 Then press that gently into those fissures until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat it with plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	 About the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 When at the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth an abscess forms and swells, then bursts, and then becomes chronic, and runs with pus, and a fistula is formed, and you treat it and the treatment does not work, then it is necessary that you burn a cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and put the burning cautery into the orifice of the fistula, and place your hand underneath until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it; and at the end do this one or two times; and then treat it with the water we have mentioned for treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	 E therefore if the wound is cut and healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotten bones according to their chapter.
Capitol .xx.	 Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	 On the Cauterization of Teeth and Softening of Veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	 When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you cure them with medicines and they do not improve, then place the head of the patient on your lap, and quickly ignite the cautery in the form that will be shown hereafter, so that you put the end of it over the tooth and insert it into it quickly, and hold your hand a little inside so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	 And then lift your hand, and then pass the cautery over it several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	 And then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and keep it there for an hour, and then stop it, because the decayed tooth is fixed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	 "About the cautery of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	 "When tooth pain is due to coldness or if there is a wound or ulcer and treatment with medicine does not work, then cauterize it using two methods: either cauterize with cow's hoof, or cauterize with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	 "Cauterizing with hoof is done by taking the hoof of a cow and placing it in burning hot iron, then take cotton and wrap it around the end of the tooth, and immediately dip that into the heated hoof and place it on the painful tooth quickly until it becomes cold.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	 "And then repeat this process several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	 "And if you wish, dip wool or cotton in the hoof mentioned above, place it on the painful tooth, and place heated iron on top until the iron reaches the marrow of the tooth cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	 "However, the cauterization with fire is done by using a hollow reed or iron tube, and there should be some thickness in its core so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	 "And then heat the cautery in the shape that will be used, and place it on the tooth while holding it with your hand until the cautery becomes cold; repeat this several times because the pain should subside either that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	 And it is necessary that, by pressing that cautery into the mouth of the patient, he should fill his mouth with good bedding and hold it for an hour, and then remove it; and this is the way to use the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	 And you should cauterize with whatever material you have at your disposal according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	 And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter .22
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	 On the Cauterization of Prolapsed Organs.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	 When prolapsed organs are due to phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to digestion with medicines, and you see that the digestion of these is slight, then you should ignite the cautery in the form shown below, which has two openings so that smoke may exit from one end. Place the heated cautery on the aposteme (swelling) once, and again if necessary, until the swelling subsides.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	 And if the swelling is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and leave it for three days, and then place a cloth soaked in vinegar on it until what the fire has burned is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for that person with ointments, bandages, and cloths until they are healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	 And the shape of the cannula or the cautery should be conveyed thus.
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	 About cauterizing a throat with hoarseness and constriction of the airways.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	 When humidity comes upon the lung channels, and especially when it is accompanied by coldness and oppression, then the patient should first be evacuated with purgative medicines, and afterwards you should cauterize them in the depressed area of the throat.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	 And take care not to reach the throat with the cautery, nor burn its cord too much.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	 And then cauterize them with another cautery at the junction of the neck at their last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	 And let his cautery be a small one, as described previously.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 Then care for that person with the previously mentioned water until they are healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	 About cauterizing lung ailments and coughs.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	 When cough and lung ailments are due to cold humidity, and the patient has no fever or phlegm, and it is an old ailment, then cauterize them with two cauteries on the collarbone in the depressed places called lion and boar; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between two nipples; and let the cauteries be small as described previously. ➤
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	 "And if you want, perform your cautery point with the pointed tool that is called 'punctum', whose shape precedes in the cauterization of earache pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 "Make points in the case of those [conditions]; and then treat them with the remedy that has been prescribed until they are healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	 "And there are three types of pointed tools for cauterization: with one you can perform three cauteries in the following way:
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter 25
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	 "On the cauterization of titillus, which is the head of the penis.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	 "When the head of the penis is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and does not return to its place in time, you should reduce its dislocation until it returns to normal. Then, by making a slight movement, it returns as it should, as we have testified. Therefore, you must first reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient onto their stomach or side; then raise the scrotum which is at the inner part of the penis towards the outer parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated to the inner parts.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And then heat the cautery which has two ends; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	 And then cauterize the cord until it penetrates through to the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will have four points.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And this is how it becomes more subtle according to the number of times; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	 And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, because there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	 And then place powdered salt on the cautery, and then make the patient rest peacefully, and let the member not be moved for any time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	 And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it is done later, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed cautery or with several cauteries, because the joint will be strengthened and the moisture will be dried out and the patient will be healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter XXVI
De cauterizacio del stomac.	 On the Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	 When cold and excessive moisture arise in the stomach to the point that it expels its contents and causes abundant vomiting, and if you continue with the usual methods of treatment without success, then it is necessary for the patient to be placed on their back, and extend their hands and feet, and then cauterize with three cauteries: one cautery below the soles of the feet with a pointed cautery the length of a finger, and two cauteries below the armpits of the same cautery, so that it forms a triangular figure; and the distance between them should not be too great to cause blistering. 》
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	 And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds the thickness of the blade of a sword, then it should be:
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	 And let the shape of the cautery be according to this form without addition. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and let this be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	 And let the stomach be cauterized by pricking it where you fear this cautery will cause harm: and know that you should test on the stomach first with a probe, according to the amount you wish, and then cauterize that spot with the cautery; and then treat it with the preceding treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	 Of the hot cautery of the foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	 When pain in the foot is caused by coldness, moisture, or excessive flatulence, and its normal condition has been disturbed by superfluous excretions, and the patient is treated with the water we have mentioned and not with cupping, then it is necessary that the patient be placed supine on his back, and test with three cauteries as shown in this form and quantity, placing them under the hips, which is the decubitus of a man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	 And do not hesitate to use the cautery as much as needed.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	 If the amount of water exceeds half the amount of medicine in the cup, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, who has already spread out his thighs and raised his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	 And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	 And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a surgical knife, when you are skilled and prudent in this art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	 And beware not to overdo the cauterization, and let the cup of all the water be adjusted so that the whole body is healed and reaches into the intestines, for the cup here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter 28
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	 On piercing a boil on the foot with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	 When you want to excise or pierce a boil on the foot and you wish to know if that boil is in the flesh of the foot or in its skin, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will experience heaviness and pain without sharpness.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	 And if it is in the skin of the foot, then the pain will be very sharp and often wearies the doctors who care for him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	 This text appears to be discussing medical procedures for treating an abscess (apostema). Here is the line-by-line translation:
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	 And cauterize with that and a cautery until the entire vein is burned, until it reaches the vessel, until there is healthy tissue.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat that person for the cure of other abscesses until they are healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	 And it is not necessary to use this form of cautery except for that which has been studied in the art of medicine and is known to be effective against many diseases; however, one should experiment with caution in this operation, but leave that to us who are more experienced and know better.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter .29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	 On the Cauterization of Pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	 The ancients said that to cauterize pleurisy caused by dry humors, it should be done in this manner: take a long, dry reed, about the thickness of a finger, and prepare it for use.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	 Then dip that reed in oil and place it on the fire. Then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauteries below, one slightly inclined towards the chin, and with two cauteries in that place which is inclined between the fifth rib and the tenth, slightly inclined towards the back; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries in the back; and with one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on the two sides of the foot, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	 And it is not necessary for you to compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be clearly visible in the procedure.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	 And some ancient people said that there are some men who use a cautery of iron similar to a ray and glowing hot, and they place it in the area between the ribs until it reaches the abscess and expels the pus, as we have said in the case of an abscess on the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	 But in this procedure with the cautery there is fear, for someone could die immediately if they puncture a fistula that has not healed.
Capitol .xxx.	 Chapter XXX
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	 On the Cauterization of the Spleen
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	 When you treat the illness of the spleen with the method we have described for treatment in the division, and your treatment does not help, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are correct. One way is to make three or four lines of cautery along the length of the spleen, according to the figure of the cauteries on the foot, whose figures have preceded this.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	 And between each cautery there should be the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the manner of the cautery should be the same as we have said for the cauteries on the foot equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	 And do not press your hand with the cautery; let the patient be raised on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	 And there is another way to cauterize, which is to ignite the cautery with two movements, as we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the handle that is located near the spleen so that the left side of the patient can lie flat.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	 And let your lifting with which you raise the handle be according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	 And then insert the two movements, one after the other, into that opening through which you have penetrated the handle from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	 And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	 And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three movements.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	 And then you care for the cautery since it has ceased to throw sparks after too many days, because it is more convenient than the other previously mentioned causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter .XXXI
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	 On Cauterizing Dropsy Patients
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	 Do not cauterize in dropsy patients except in the ankles properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	 Here's the translation of the provided sentence:
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	 And let the depth of the cautery be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	 And then lay aside the cautery, opened for such that you can hold it for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	 And do not evacuate the patient from the treatment near the cautery with water, but rather add two helpers to him, and hastily dress his wound with aid.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	 The form of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be sharp, as its form has been described above, and it is that with which the back is cauterized, it should be olive-shaped according to its form as described above.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter .xxxii
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	 On the Cauterization of Feet and Hips.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	 When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular veins, lift your hand with the cautery and do not turn it; then lift your hand, and do not return it completely, because the water saturates again.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	 The cautery should be in this form: And then make two cauteries on each hip, and on each hip let the cautery be made with the pointed end of the cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	 And let there be two cauteries according to the length of the cushion: place one at the upper part and the other at the middle of the cushion; and on each cushion, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	 And leave the wound open without treatment for a long time so that no pus comes out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	 And then treat it with those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter .33
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	 On the Cauterization of the Abdomen
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	 When the abdomen is afflicted by cold and dampness, which weakens the faculties – namely, the digestive and retentive faculties found in the stomach and intestines – it should be treated with various methods of treatment and regimens. Sometimes patients suffer from an ailment that causes the faculties to leave their place; then cauterize that area with a large cautery on the patient's stomach, as was previously described for the cauterization of the stomach, using circular cauteries and four subtle cauteries around the navel, as well as subtle claw-shaped cauteries; and one or two cauteries on the alcatin.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	 And if there is an excess of humidity and the patient can withstand it, then cauterize in that area on the bladder and on the intestines, and carefully place two cauteries on the stomach near the groin, for this is a perfect treatment which will not cause harm.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 "Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	 "On cauterizing old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	 "When there are old hemorrhoids or one of the large humors that cause swelling or corrupt moisture, and they are not healed with the water mentioned in the division, then use three pointed cauteries on the pus below the small of the back in a triangle shape, and one cautery above the navel, cutting through two fingers' width.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	 "And if you believe that his stomach is swollen and his food not properly digested, and his face sometimes pale, then cauterize that part of the stomach with a large cautery as previously stated; and with one cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on his gallbladder with a pointed cautery. Leave the cauteries open for some time, and then treat him until he is cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	 "Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	 "On cauterizing abscesses near their opening.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	 "When you cut open an abscess, then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	 "Then insert that heated into the cut abscess, and continue your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And do this once or twice, because if the veins are too many, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and then treat them with an ointment suitable for their condition until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	 And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the surface, it will be more effective in helping.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 Chapter .xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	 About the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in certain parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	 When nature does not obey the work that has been described in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, let him be healed with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	 Therefore, when someone has an old fistula that occurs naturally and it is exuding pus and corrupted humors, it is more fitting to probe it with a fine probe, and then find out the depth of it with the aforementioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	 Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray (i.e., a thin, pointed cautery).
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	 And then place this heated cautery into the fistula, and according to the amount in which you insert the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 And repeat this process with the cautery until all the corrupt flesh is burned at least once or twice or three times, according to your needs.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	 And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if there is a fistula going into the bladder or the intestines, then beware of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it will not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for the place so that it may heal.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	 And if the place is sealed and all the material has been removed from it, and it remains that way for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	 And if the materials are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or the bone beneath is rotting, or this happens for one of those reasons which will be remembered in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter .XXXVII.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	 On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	 When there is pain in the hemorrhoids due to cold or excessive flatulence, and for this reason the patient's anus is irritated, then it is necessary to cauterize the area above the hemorrhoids with a pointed cautery on each hemorrhoid, using the nail of which I have mentioned before.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	 And make a strong cautery with the second [point], a little deeper, so that three lines of cauteries will be formed, and thus they will be more effective in helping.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 It looks like you haven't provided the actual text of the medieval medical treatise for this particular example (Capitol .xxxviii). Please provide the specific text or line you would like translated, and I will do my best to interpret and translate it into English for you.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	 "About the Cauterization of the Bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	 "When debility and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and moisture, such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area just below the bladder where the pubic hairs begin. Cauterize with a pointed instrument on the right side of the bladder and with another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	 "And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of coldness in the person; and cauterize that area with a pointed instrument just below the back, or with two instruments if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	 "And let the cautery be made accordingly as needed.
Capitol .xxxix.	 "Chapter XXXIX
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	 "About Cauterizing the Uterus.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	 "When coldness and moisture occur in the uterus, thus preventing conception, and menstrual blood is corrupted, and its onset is delayed, and pain occurs during its passage, then the area should be cauterized with three instruments around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with an instrument just below the back, or with two instruments, and let the cautery be made accordingly.
Capitol .xl.	 Chapter 40
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	 On the Cautery for the Dislocation of the Ankle
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	 When moistness and mucus are infused into the ankle area, and this is caused by its displacement from its proper place, a sign of this is that one leg appears longer than the other when compared side by side.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	 And the location of the dislocation is found in the swollen part.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	 Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the ankle area with a circular-shaped cautery, because you will have marked with a test in the circle of the ankle as it is turned, and this way the affected area will be centered within the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	 And let the shape of the cautery previously described be used for the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	 And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize with three small cauteries using a large olive-shaped one.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And let the cautery be made according to the size of the entire hernia; and then care for it until it is healed. xspace
Capitol .xli.	 Chapter 41
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	 On Cautery for Sciatic Nerve Pain
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	 When pain occurs in the ankle area due to cold and moisture, the patient is treated with the previously mentioned water-based remedies, but if they are ineffective or outdated, then it is necessary to purge the patient of thick humors using either foul-smelling pills, artificial pills, or similar; and then cauterize them.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	 And the manner of the cautery in that case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	 According to two known methods, one of which is to cauterize the affected area on the broad part of the ankle with three triangular cauteries in this manner; and perform this with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	 And let the space between each cautery be the size of a finger's thickness, and whether the cautery is small or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	 But sometimes the cauteries should be placed in the middle of the ankle, because there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	 And if you wish, you can also cauterize with the circle that precedes the form in the cauterization of ankle dislocation, which should be a continuous and burning circle around the entire tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	 And this is the manner of cauterization for gout when the pain is located at the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	 But if it extends into the thigh, then you should cauterize that area with two cauteries on the thigh in the place where the patient feels the pain; and with one cautery on the knee, four fingers below the navel.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	 And if you are using a cautery knife, let the depth of the cauterization be according to the thickness of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	 And if the patient indicates that the pain has spread to other parts of the body, especially in the joints, then cauterize those areas as well with the cautery at three points or four, or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	 And if the patient indicates that there is pain beneath the nail towards the toe, then cauterize it with a cautery knife.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	 And be careful in all cautery that you do not go too deep with the cautery to the point of burning nerves or large vessels, as this could harm the patient by causing infection or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	 And I have seen some cases where the person who performed the cautery went too deep and the foot swelled up until the tumor reached the foot, and then it was pierced and the whole foot became infected.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	 And shortly after, he suffered from a severe stomachache, and then death followed.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	 And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	 And the wise have said that in the cautery of water, one should use a cautery like this: make it similar to an iron circle, whose circumference is half a palm; and let its openings be according to the thickness of a fingernail or a little less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And inside that circle there should be another third [circle]; and the space between them should be the width of a finger; and those circles should be open on two sides; and the length of these chains should be one finger or two fingers, and make on these edges a decent iron border on the circles; and this is its form:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	 Next, heat it in the fire until it becomes red and sparks, then place it on the open wound of the patient while they are lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	 And therefore cauterize with three pointed cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then let it be for three days; and then bandage it with a border, leaving the wound open for many days; and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	 Says Al-Zahrawi: "O my sons, we use this type of cautery very little due to the fear of dealing with it, and because we find few people who are skilled in handling it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	 But for those suffering from these cauteries, they will find the place to be painful.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	 But make cauteries with adherent medicines, and you should make two circles having an armilla perforated in which they can put the handle of the iron door; let the length of the walls be at the height of two fingers or as needed.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	 And if the spaces which are between each joint of the finger; and they have been opened from below and above, and they should contain themselves between them according to this manner:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	 And then place the patient lying on their side over the affected joint, and press your hand over the joint; then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let that quality be with a small fire little by little, and keep it for the duration of one hour, and the patient will endure the biting and adjustment — because this remedy bites like fire — until the biting stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	 And then lift your hand with the instrument and wipe away all the hot water from the joint with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	 And then let it be for three days and place a cold compress on the joint until the blackness of the bruise has dissipated, and leave it like this for several days, and there will run from it a pus; this is called healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	 And if the pain extends into the hip or thigh, make for him a statue that contains water according to what is done for the joint as well.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	 And this is the method of using hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	 Recipe for alkali and unslaked lime, each in equal parts; grind them and place them in a new vessel, leaving a small hole in the bottom through which water can enter as needed.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	 Then place another pot under the first pot, and pour over the alkali and quicklime twice its volume in fresh water; when you have mixed these together with your hand into a good paste, allow the liquid to drain through the hole into the lower pot.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	 Then adjust all this water and pour it over fresh lime and new alkali, because at that point it will have a very strong acidity, which is used in many medical operations and for the cauterization of other members, as it produces a burning effect.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	 And similarly for some medicines with which one cauterizes, such as terebinth and honey of aniseed, also mixed with soap.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	 And Valerius recounts from an ancient author the operation and treatment by which watery pain and sciatica are cured, and he greatly praises this treatment, saying that no other cure is necessary, and because it is cured by one application as he relates, for he quickly leaves the bath as soon as he enters it.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	 And it is that a poultice of green henbane should be taken; and if green henbane is not found, then take fresh figs; and everything should be thoroughly crushed with a little gray salt and placed on the ankle where the pain is, or on the knee, or on the thigh, and bandaged.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	 And it should be left for a duration of three hours, or however long the patient feels relief from the pain.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	 And then have him enter a bath and when his body is reddened from the heat, make him leave the bath and stand on the ground, because the pain will cease and he will be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	 And know that it is not necessary to use cautery with these remedies, except in the case of body purging.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	 But Escorides said that when the straight vein is cauterized with a goat's hair, it helps him very well; and the cautery should be done in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the fingers.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	 Then take a dry goat hair and burn it with fire until it becomes charcoal; then place it on the wool, and press it in so that it is spread out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	 And then continue doing this, and do not stop until the feeling of biting penetrates into the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	 And this method of cauterization is called "cautery of cows.
Capitol .xlii.	 Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	 On the Cauterization of Back Pain
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	 Sometimes pain in the back is caused by many things, such as a fall or a blow, or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, due to the infusion of cold and damp material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	 Cauterization is only effective in this specific case caused by the infusion of cold material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	 Therefore, it is necessary to first evacuate the patient with purging pills and similar medicines, which should be applied on the back where the pain is located in three lines according to the length of the person. After that, place ten cauteries on each line, or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the strength of the medicine.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	 And let the cauterization be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	 And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries in a cruciform pattern like this:
Capitol .xliii.	 **Chapter 43.**
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	 **On Cauterization at the Onset of Jaundice.**
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	 **Many observations indicate that this illness often afflicts young children; and the first sign of its onset in children is swelling and restlessness around their eyes.**
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	 **And you will find in the lower part of the back, near the buttocks, that it begins to protrude over the other vertebrae.**
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	 **Therefore, when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize the area with a circular cautery like this:**
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	 **so that the cautery covers all parts of the vertebra equally.**
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	 **And if you wish, you can also cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines long.**
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	 **And the points should be close together.**
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	 **Then, take care of the area until it is healed with what we have mentioned above.**
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	 **But beware that a cautery should not be administered for jaundice caused by nerve spasms.**
Capitol .xliv.	 **Chapter 44.**
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	 **On Cauterization for Gout and Joint Pain.**
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	 **When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.**
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	 And therefore when gout is cured by treatment due to cold and the pain is not relieved, then apply cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	 And if you cauterize that area near the joint of the foot with several cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And let it be cauterized with an olive-shaped tool, which looks like this:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	 And if the pain moves into the toes or other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauteries in all directions using this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	 And if many cauteries are necessary, then cauterize and do not press too hard with your hand before using the cautery, but only hold it by the handle.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	 And if the pain moves into the toe and the foot, then administer the cautery which we have mentioned in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	 And if the pain is only in the hands and it is called suagra, then prick around the fingers like this: prick along these two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	 And if pain remains in the said places, then puncture around the circle of the nails on each finger and on the edge of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	 And if the pain extends to the shoulders or arms after several days, then cauterize all parts of the limbs.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	 And do not evacuate the patient without proper management and reception of medicine, for if good care is taken and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, they will be healed, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	 Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	 On Cauterization of Wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	 When there is a break in the intestines and they protrude before the hernia, and this begins to happen, then you must tell the patient to leave off their food for that day and use gentle causes so that the opening of the belly does not increase.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	 And then follow the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to hold their breath until they are thrown out or the hernia or intestines appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	 And then return with the said words and signs, and try to open the break over the bone of the patella, indicating the extreme end which should be similar to half a circle in the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And then heat the cautery whose shape is as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	 until it becomes very red and emits sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	 And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	 And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under him, another servant on his legs, and another on his chest, holding his hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	 And then place the cautery on that spot with your hand holding the cautery straight, and push until you reach the midpoint of the distal phalanx; repeat this action if you did not succeed in the first attempt to reach the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	 Be careful of the movement of the intestine during your cauterization, so that you do not burn it and cause death or other great harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	 And know that when you with the cautery do not reach the bone, your operation will not be effective.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	 And it is fitting for a child's cautery to be delicate according to their size and age. ︎
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	 Then care for the cautery site for three days with bandages until the scab of the fire has fallen off.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for him with other ointments until he is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	 And the patient should lie on his back for 40 days, until the area and the wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	 And it is necessary to adjust his diet according to the duration of his treatment and to prevent his stomach from getting too full, lest the intestines come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	 And when he wishes to get up after about 40 days, then administer a properly prepared poultice, and let him keep it for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	 And he should be spared from work and from excessive eating and drinking, and from loud voices, for when he follows this complete treatment, he will surely be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	 And I will explain the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. At first, and if you do not wish them to bleed, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; and let what is expelled from the intestines be like the third part of it; and then care for him with what we have said, and he will not die.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	 And some say that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery like this, because it is indicated by experience:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	 Sure, I can help translate that sentence for you:
Capitol .xlvi.	 Chapter 46
De cauterizacio de torcio.	 On the Cautery of a Hernia
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	 When in some members [limbs] by accident or blow pain occurs and that pain persists for a long time and you do not comfort the patient with medicine, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	 And the cautery should be of every member according to its greatness and smallness, its virtues and faults, and the location of the hernia and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	 Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for it is customary for those pains to be transmitted from member to member close to it, so you must catch them with cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter 47
De cauterizacio de lepra.	 On the Cautery of Leprosy
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	 Lepers are sometimes cured with a cautery, and especially so if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	 And so when you want to cauterize this [patient], consider if the leprosy is common and of the type that we have said in the division, and it has not yet begun to spread, and you fear for the patient that corruption will encompass all of his body and all its parts, then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and another below it, even with the forehead to the end of the hair; and both on two temples; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	 And finally, with the cautery in your hand, press a little into the bone to make a slight impression, and from this remove the scabies, so that the expulsion of large vapors is alleviated; cauterize on the spleen as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	 And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize that person with those cauteries which we have mentioned on the head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both temples, and with two cauteries on both shoulders of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with one large one on the vertebrae near the waist, and one on the waist, and with two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and with two on the soles of the feet, and one on each sole, and with two on the elbows, and with two on the wrists, and with two on the fingers of their hands and feet; cauterize that over all the joints of the aforementioned hands and feet, and on each heel of their feet, and on the soles of their hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	 And beware of the nerves that are on the sole, lest you burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	 And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the groin.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	 And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and effective it will be; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cauteries like others do, because their body is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	 And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and the joints, as previously specified by the types of tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for the cauterized area with powder made from ground ivy mixed with honey and other remedies until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	 Chapter .xlviii
De cauterizacio de stupor.	 On the Cautery of Stupor
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	 When any member is benumbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member, whether large or small.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	 And let your cautery enter a little into the thickness of the cord.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	 And sometimes a numbness that should be in the hands and feet, or in the spine of the back, is cauterized where the nerves emerge that move that member, and the numbness is removed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	 "But do not proceed with this unless you are skilled in the anatomy of the limbs and the course of the nerves that move throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	 "Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	 "On the Cauterization of Warts, which are Tumors.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	 "When warts are old and you do not apply to them any of the medicinal ointments, then you cauterize it with a pointed cautery for a short while, according to the size of the wart's surface, until its whiteness and color disappear, and its color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	 "Then treat it with a mixture of barley flour and lentils, olive oil, and rue leaves, along with pigeon blood or blackbird blood, ensuring each ingredient is properly divided and all are well mixed together. Then take a clean cloth, soak it in this mixture, and place it on the affected area until it heals.
Capitol .l.	 "Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	 "On the Cauterization of Crabs (cancer).
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	 "When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its entire circumference as if it were turning.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	 "And the wise have said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the lesion; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it will become ulcerated, and I have indeed seen this happen some times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	 And it is more appropriate that he be cauterized around him in a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	 Chapter II
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	 On the Cauterization of Paralysis
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	 When someone is delayed in healing, and this is due to excess humors or the condition of the patient, who is old and weak, with little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten the healing of the paralysis; then cauterize around him with multiple small puncturing cauteries; and then leave it alone so that it will hasten in healing.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	 But if you want to perforate him with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose shape is as follows: and place it in the middle of the paralyzed area until it penetrates the spine.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you cauterize him in that lower area so that the arm's body is relieved; and then care for it until he is healed.
Capitol .lii.	 Chapter III
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	 On Cauterization of Erosion
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	 Erosion is the walking corruption in the limb, which erodes it like fire consuming dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	 Certainly! Let's break down the sentence into smaller parts to translate it accurately:
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	 And immediately cauterize it entirely until you have removed all the corruption and there is no remaining cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	 And then leave it for three days, and place on the cauterized areas constantly a mixture of oil until all the scabs are removed and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	 And then treat it with flesh-generating ointment.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	 However, if after three days the flesh that grows is healthy and there is no corruption, it is good; but if not, then you must repeat the cautery on the parts that remain corrupted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	 And sometimes a corrosive medicine is used, because it serves as a substitute for cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	 However, cauterization with fire is more effective against pus.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	 And I have already explained the treatment with corrosive medicine in the previous section, so take that when you have need of it.
Capitol .liii.	 Chapter 53
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	 On the Cauterization of Wounds and Similar Conditions
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	 Often one sees in the parts below the affected foot what is called a nail, which is a large, deep wound that penetrates the foot; and these are cauterized in two ways: by fire and by hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	 "However, the cautery with fire is that which ignites the pointed cautery like a vulture's beak, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that contains the entire nail, and it should be of fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	 "Then place the glowing nail on the nail, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	 "And let it be for three days until it begins to cast a scab.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	 "And then bandage it with crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the bandage on it for one night, because by morning it will be healed from its causes.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	 "And then treat the area with regenerative flesh ointment until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	 "And if it does not heal and many small growths appear on the surface of the body, mainly in the hands and feet, then you should apply cautery with water to those areas. Take a thin needle or pin made of iron or bird feather and place it on the nail; then pour a little hot water into the needle's tip, hold it firmly, and roll it gently with your hand all over the affected area, pressing the edge of the needle into the root of the nail. The hot water will find its way to the core of the root; wait for the patient to feel the heat for about an hour, then remove it, as the nail with its roots will be healed by morning.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	 And do similarly with others until all of them are on their bodies.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	 Then treat those further, after the reasons for the nails have been eliminated with ointments that promote skin growth.
Capitol .liiii.	 Chapter .43
De cauterizacio de tremor.	 On Cautery for Tremors
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	 When someone has a tremor due to nerve coldness or fever caused by coldness, or for any similar reason, then you should cauterize them with four cauteries, or five on the vertebrae of their back, one cautery between each vertebra; and with a cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, using an olive-sized cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	 And his tremor will subside, hastening the healing of the cold disease.
Capitol .lv.	 Chapter .55
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	 On Cautery for Acute Conditions in the Body
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	 When there are acute eruptions on the body and pustules are formed from coarse corrupted matter, it is necessary at the beginning when they appear to cauterize the head of each fistula with a fine cautery made of myrtle wood, the end of which is extended with fire; or with a long surgical lancet; or with a lens-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	 Here's a possible translation of your provided text:
Capitol lvi.	 It seems like there might be a mistake in the text you provided for "Capitol lvi." The phrase "Capitol lvi" does not appear to be part of the medieval medical treatise you are referring to. However, I can help you translate the previous lines if needed or provide further assistance with additional text from the same treatise. Please provide more context or the next line from the text for translation.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	 About the cauterization of blood flow due to an arrow injury.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	 When you see the signs of blood flow from an arrow injury that has exited the wound or caused damage to tendons or muscles and is difficult to stop, it is necessary to cauterize it immediately to prevent further complications.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	 Therefore, when this happens to someone, you should immediately clamp the orifice of the arrow wound with your hand and place your finger over it, applying pressure until the bleeding stops and does not continue.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	 Then place in the fire some olive oil burners, both small and large, in sufficient quantity, and blow on them until they are well alight.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	 Then take one of these [burners], either small or large, depending on the location and size of the wound where the artery is cut; quickly apply it to the vein after you have removed your finger, and cauterize it until the blood is stopped and sealed.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	 And if blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove the thread and extract the cautery, then immediately take another cautery from those prepared in the fire, and continue doing this until the bleeding is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	 And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, lest another illness come upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	 And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding by any other means than four: either with a cautery as we have said, or by extraction if it has not been extracted, for when it is extracted its extremities are better burned and the blood is restricted; or let it be tied with thread or a bandage with strong constriction, or medicines that have the power to restrict blood may be placed upon it; and they should be strengthened with a cushion with decent compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	 But he who administers decent constriction with a bandage and strong constriction with cloth or by the position of hot compresses and similar things, should act only belatedly.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	 But if this should happen to someone and neither the physician nor medicine is present, then stop with pressure of the index finger over the orifice of that vein as we have said, and continue with great constriction until the blood is stopped from the main source of the wound, and do not remove the thread from above the artery; and above the artery, sprinkle with very cold water until the blood is frozen and thickened; and beware that there will be need for cautery or necessary medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	 Start the second section.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	 Of cutting, puncturing, cupping, bloodletting, and wounds, and their similars.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	 These are the words of Al-Zahrawi (Abulcasis).
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	 In the first chapter, we have spoken of all sicknesses in which it is proper to use a fire-cautery and burning medicines, and of the occasions and causes thereof, and of the instruments necessary therefor, with their forms; and I have arranged the chapters of the head downward to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	 And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the seeker may find relief therein, when he demands it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	 And before I begin this, son, you should know that in this chapter is what was lacking in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	 And because this requires great care, since in the operation which is frequently done in this chapter, there is evacuation with blood, in which life resides; you must be cautious of the splashing from the vein or the incision over the abscess, or the opening of an fistula, or the cleansing of a wound, or the extraction of an arrow, or the cutting of stone, and their similars.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	 And all of them are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the worst cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	 And I advise you that this should not happen to you, for sometimes those who are healthy can be struck down by many illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	 And there are some who will go away with their illness and it will be light for them to die, and this is due to the severity of the illness they find themselves in, and because of the length of their illness, and also because the illness is one that signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	 And among them is he who gives you his wealth and property, with you expecting health for him, but his illness is fatal.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	 Therefore, you should not agree to take in the one who comes to you in this manner; and let your caution be greater than greed, and do not presume any cause for this unless you have certain knowledge that proves it to be so, and to which follows a praiseworthy outcome.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	 And use in the treatment of all your patients the skill of prognosis and diagnosis, for in that lies your help towards acquiring fame and remembrance, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	 "O, sons, may God inspire in you His understanding and do not remove direction and protection from you, for that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	 "And I have arranged this chapter, dividing it into sections as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauteries, concerning the care of the head down to the feet, so that you may find relief for what you are asking about and what you need.
Capitol primier.	 "First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	 "On the treatment of water, which is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	 "Know that this illness often comes to children from childbirth, and when the nurse tightly binds the child's head without care.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	 "And sometimes it happens due to hidden causes which are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	 "But I have only seen this illness in infants; and all those that I saw met their death, and so it seems to me like an evil work on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	 "And I have seen an infant whose head was filled with water, and the infant's head was always thus swollen until it could no longer move itself because of the greatness of its head, and moreover, the moisture increased until death by fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	 And this moisture has accumulated either between the tendon and the bone, or beneath the bone on the fibula.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	 Because the operation on that area, if the moisture is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then it is necessary for you to cut into the middle of the head with a slit in the width, and let the length of the slit be two nights until the moisture runs out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 And therefore, if the moisture has increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two slits in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	 And if the moisture is beneath the bone, its sign is that you will see the tendon's sheath open on all sides and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand from within and nothing is hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 It is necessary for you to cut into the middle of the head with three slits in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	 And then extract all the moisture at the incision; and then strengthen the slits with cloths and poultices; and then cover it from above with wine and oil for five days, and then remove the bandages and treat the wound with dressings and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	 Here's my attempt to translate the provided sentence into English:
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	 And be careful not to cut the artery, as this could cause bleeding and lead to the patient's death due to blood loss accompanied by fluid loss.
Capitol .ii.	 Chapter 2
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	 From the incision of the arteries that are near the ears, they are called heliotropes.
Capitol segon.	 Chapter three
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	 When someone experiences cataracts or ruptures in the eyes or feet and it is old age and medical treatments do not help, then the last treatment for this is to cut those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	 And therefore it is necessary that when you want to cut those [arteries] the patient should raise their head, and then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries become visible; and then have the patient's neck held tight with some cloth; and also consider where the vein pulses; and on the areas near the ears press down, and they will hide until in some men.  (This sentence seems to be unfinished or perhaps missing words.)
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	 Then mark the artery with a stylus, and then cut each one with a sharp, well-divided scalpel, pushing until it reaches the bone, and do this along the length of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	 And if you wish, insert the spatula below the artery and split it into the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	 And let the length of the incision be two fingers wide, for when any vein is cut, the blood comes out with a pulsating flow, which jumps out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	 But if the artery does not appear at once, then you must measure from the ear to the nape of the neck the distance of three fingers, and then probe with your finger, and find the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	 And the amount of blood that should be drawn is six ounces, and it must not be taken from him more or less, and all this depends on the condition of the patient and the fullness of his artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 And then consider the wound, and if there is any cause of infection on the bone, then cut it open so that a suppurating abscess does not form.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then strengthen the wound with soft pads and linen bandages, and then heal it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	 Chapter III
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	 On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	 When someone has an ancient or sudden acute migraine due to moisture in the brain and the quality of the sinews in the temples, or a very intense and similar headache, and it is not cured by the usual methods of medical treatment, then we have found relief for these illnesses in the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those, as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	 Based on the context and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	 And if it is hidden from you, then tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the vein appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Then take the spatula, which has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	 Then you cut through the skin with that tool easily until you reach the vein; and then pour on it oil and extract it from the superior parts until you remove it from the skin and discover it from all the tissues that were left beneath it, entirely.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	 However, if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the tip of the oncii (a small tool), and then cut off a piece of it according to the length by which its ends are stretched and contracted, so that there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not cut off, the blood will not rise entirely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	 Then evacuate one to three cups of blood.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	 And if the vein is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with double strong silk thread or with long ropes, and do not cut off the putrefaction before the wound heals and the blood flow stops.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	 And approximately incise the superfluous part that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time, or at another nearby time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	 And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery between the bones using a bone-pointed cautery until the extremities of it are cut, and it will remain in the place where that same work was done.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	 And it is a better work if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion; because cautery is of those causes that help the finishing moistures, and therefore it is better in the help.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	 And it is appropriate to remove the arrowheads that have occupied the old wound site, and let them be covered with well-prepared powders, and then treat it with dry medicines that make the flesh grow and with bandages until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 And if during the work another vision happens where blood flows from the arrow wound, then you must quickly restrain that blood, either with a cautery or by filling the wound site, and press your hand until the bleeding is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	 And if none of those causes are present to you, then place your finger over the wound until the blood is congealed, and sprinkle the wound with very cold water until the sharpness settles, and it is strengthened as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	 Here's the translation of your sentence:
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	 And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	 And let the sharpness of both needles be similar.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	 However, if the sharpness is less than that of two needles, it is better, because if they are as sharp as two needles, you may approach too close to each part and cut the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	 Therefore, because there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire should be kept in them, and the flesh will be cut lightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	 And this work is better for all works and lighter too.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	 And let the space that is between two needles be the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	 Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	 On the care of the body for acute and burning tears from the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	 When the tears are acidic and it is the body of those veins which are on top of the head outside, do not put any remedy from medicine in this, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes red and they feel crawling on their forehead as if it were the crawling of ants, and the eyes of that one become exhausted, wet to such an extent that even their eyelashes are soaked, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, the ancients used to perform this operation in the cure of these, and they named that cure with a lancet.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	 And you command the patient to shave the hairs on their forehead, and then you make three equally spaced incisions on the forehead according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	 And if the length of the incision is two digits: let one incision be equally distant from the tip of the nose to the middle of the forehead; and the second according to the length a little below the movements of the eyelids which are on the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	 And beware of the incision of the arteries that are in two layers, and stretch your hand along the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	 And if the space of each incision is three digits wide.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	 And if you have a sponge or very dry cloth with which to wipe the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	 And then insert the speculum with two pointed ends, of which this is the shape of its incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	 whose point of entry is between the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	 With it, remove everything that is between the two incisions, including the tissue that is on the bone, and then do this from the middle of the first incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	 And immediately reach into this space and insert at first another time an additional instrument called a cutellar, which is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	 And place the sharp edge against the flesh close to the tendon, and the dull edge inside the bone. Use that instrument until it reaches the middle crack, and with it, cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	 But continue the incision until it reaches the tendon, and then immediately make another incision into the middle crack until it reaches the other crack.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	 And since a large quantity of blood flows out, press on the places of the frozen blood clots.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	 And immediately place on each crack a piece of old cotton cloth, and place over those pills soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and make sure it does not develop into a pustule cautiously.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	 And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of hot water or tepid water, and immediately treat it with an ointment made from basil with rose oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	 Chapter V
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	 Sure, I'll do my best to translate this line by line. Here it goes:
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	 When someone has acute and continuous diarrhea, and the patient's cheeks are often thin, and their appearance is weakened, and their eyelids are ulcerated and have lost hair, and there is a severe headache with subsequent extrusion, then you should know from these symptoms that the diarrhea does not come from the lower veins, but from the internal organs.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	 And the best treatment for this is as follows: Order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in the middle of the forehead, a small one according to its size (and begin with the left temple incision into the right temple; and let the incision go into the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples' sinews which are good for chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	 Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the incision with old cotton or linen rags.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 And then cover it with powder mixed in wine and oil to prevent a painful abscess from forming.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	 And when you remove this and see that the abscess has diminished, then it is necessary to scrape the bone until new flesh begins to grow on it. And treat that with a drying regimen that causes the flesh to grow, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and make a plaster from them and apply it to these wounds for the growth of new flesh.
Capitol .vi.	 Chapter 6
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	 On the care of what falls into the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	 All causes that fall into the ears are of four kinds: either it is a mineral substance or something similar to stone, such as iron or glass; or it is from a plant, such as seeds or beans; or it is a liquid substance, such as water and vinegar and their likenesses; or some kind of creature.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	 And therefore, when a stone or something similar from these causes falls into the ear and does not fit or grow in the ear, then place the ear towards the sunlight. And if you see the stone, then drip some oil of violets or sesame onto it, and immediately administer its extraction, make them sneeze with conditionals, and open their nostrils for the event of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	 Then place in the ear some weights of cloth or wool and extend the ear to the sides above, because small items are usually expelled with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if it is not expelled, then administer its extraction with the instrument called subtle gesticulator epicyclical, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	 And if it has been forgotten with gestures, it is good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a subtle ounce, doubled only a little.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	 And therefore, if it is not forgotten in this way, then make a tube of iron and insert the tip of the tube into the hole of the ear, and close around the tube with wax and softened oil, so that nothing is open except the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	 Then extract it with your breath with strong suction, for many times we have seen this work.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	 But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take of hawk’s fat or of wax made into a pellet with which birds are caught, a small quantity, and place that at the end of a ray, and then wrap around that a bandage properly placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	 Then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	 And therefore if it is not forgotten with all the causes that we have mentioned, then you must cut that before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	 And the way to cut that is to first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein and extract blood according to the strength of the patient, then make that cut between your hands and turn the ear to the parts above, and with a small incision in the back of the ear, let out the pus from it in its most swollen place.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 And if the split is in the shape of a crescent moon until it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, remove it with appropriate instruments; then close the split immediately, and care for it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	 And if the cause of falling in the ear is one of the waxes that grows and swells, then administer the care and extraction of it; but if it does not obey you at first, then take a thin spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	 And administer with that the absorption of that wax which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	 And do not do this when you think that it has already been softened by the steam of the ear, and place that in small pouches, and then extract from those with tweezers or a thin hook, or with suction as we have said, because the removal of it is easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	 But in the case of water that has entered the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze with some conditions at the beginning, and fill his ear with some old cloth, and pour water over that ear where there is water, and if by this it is removed, good; and if not, then take several thin pebbles and stones according to the length of the finger, and heat them in the fire a little, and the patient should insert one of these into the hole of his ear and jump on one foot from that side and strike with another stone against the stone which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	 "Therefore, do not cease this with stone until all the water has been expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	 "And when the water has been completely expelled, you should take some paper or cloth and place one end in the ear, then extend the other end into the fire until it is burnt.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	 "Then place another cloth and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is expelled, and use a probe in the same way as mentioned above for the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	 "However, in the case of an animal entering that ear, if it is a small creature similar to a fly, treat it as we have said in the section on flies; but if it is a large creature that causes swelling inside the ear, then administer its removal with tweezers and scissors, and the reason for this is that it is lighter than all other things that fall into the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	 "However, in the case of removing a worm that has been born in the ear, when you treat it with the water we have mentioned in the section and in the treatise on distillations, if your treatment does not succeed, then you should look into the ear towards the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And thus if here appears any cause due to worms, then extract it with tweezers or fine forceps. But if no cause appears, then take a canula that is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, which has this form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	 And introduce the narrow end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; then suck out strongly with it and do this many times until all the worms have been expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	 But if the patient does not comply with this treatment, then you fill and seal around the circumference of the canula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already been tested by the ancients in the cure for worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And let your effusion be that with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, the shape of which is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	 And make it of silver or brass, narrow in shape, and with a small hole at the end, and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	 Therefore, it should be placed so that it fits into the cavity of the canula, where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	 And if you wish, take a small reed and wrap it decently at the end, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or juice from some herb, or water from these medicines through the tube — which is in the ear —, and then insert the reed with the cotton on top and press with your hand until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	 And let what has been inserted in the ear be slightly heated with fire first.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	 And ensure that the liquid you will pour into the ear is not too cold, for ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	 Chapter VII
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	 On the treatment of ear blockages.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	 Sometimes some infants are born with their mothers' unperforated navels in the ear canal due to a wound or a piece of flesh stuck there; and this blockage sometimes occurs in the front of the ear canal which does not recognize the sound, and sometimes it is in the parts outside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	 And that which occurs at the front of the ear, which does not perceive sound, is in the greatest difficulty for healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	 And in that moment when you achieve the [state/condition], it is necessary for you to place the patient's ear toward the sun and observe that.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if you see an apparent swelling, open it with a thin spatula like this one:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	 If the affected area is small and one part is sharp while the other is not; and if the spatula is two fingers long, it will not cause damage to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	 And so if the swelling is due to flesh born in the ear or in its meat, then take that [swelling] with subtle scissors and cut it vigorously until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	 And if the swelling is in the edge of the ear, then take a thin reed long and warm it slightly with fire, and then insert that into the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	 And so if you notice swelling with water that the patient finds easily, due to heaviness of hearing, try to relieve the pressure of it gently; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then place in the ear a cloth made of linen according to the quantity and width of the hole which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some liquid, dip it in rosewater and sprinkle it over the wound three times daily; and if you see that the ear has already formed a pustule, then it is necessary to remove the liquid and replace it with another liquid which you will wrap in a cerate made from rose oil until the pustule subsides; and then cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	 If bleeding occurs, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the wound, and use other remedies that restrict blood flow, which are described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	 Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	 On the care of athelia, which affects the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	 Athelia that affects the eyelids of the eyes can sometimes be moist, and other times dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	 Therefore, you should have them held with pliers or tweezers, and then cut them off with the edge of their roots, and then place [something] on the areas as described.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	 But if pain with blood flow occurs, then cauterize them with a subtle, pointed cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	 And the best cauterization is to do it near the incisions, and they often return when there remains any cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	 Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	 Treatment of growths that occur on the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	 Often in the eyelids of the eyes, some cause similar to a growth occurs in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called a growth.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	 And it is an accumulation of thick fluid in the eyelids below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	 Therefore, the operation on them is such that you should first consider if the swelling in them is due to something coming out of the eyelid and spreading to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	 Therefore, cut over that with an incision through the length, and then carefully drain it from all parts until it is dry, and then suspend it with thread and cauterize it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 But if you are not skilled in the cutting of it, then you should only penetrate the eyelid with an incision little by little, and this will be noticed in no case.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And if the swelling is large, then you should adjust it with stitching; and care for it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	 And if it is small, then no harm will come to you from that, because the juice of it restores and heals that place.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 And if the swelling inclines towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should cut the inner surface, and then lift the eyelid and suspend the swelling with thread, or whatever incision you find necessary, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, this will be noticed in no case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	 And at the beginning, wash the wounds with salt water; and treat the area with water that encourages healing until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	 Chapter .10
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	 Of the treatment of cicatrix on the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	 Cicatrix is the growth that forms on the tissues of the upper eyelid, and it mainly affects children, worsening their vision and sometimes causing them to lose sight in one eye; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears are constantly falling from them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	 And for this reason you see these children squinting all the time, and even when they sleep; and their eyelids are swollen, which already covers inflammation, and there is a sign of blindness in the eye; and when you press on that spot with your fingers, you feel blindness inside them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	 And the way to operate on that is for the patient to place their head in your lap, and then place a cloth over them and make a circle on it according to the size that contains arthritis from all sides, and then place that circle on the affected area and press with your fingers all around so that blindness is gathered in the middle of the circle. Then open the middle of that humidity with a spatula that cuts with a longitudinal fissure, and the fissure should not be larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	 In the patient's abdomen, it is necessary for you to cut through the entire colon until you reach the rectum, because in the most severe cases, a fistula forms in the rectum through an opening according to the shape of white hair.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	 Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers at the edges and turn it over in your right and left hands until it is emptied.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	 And be careful not to push into the opening with the spatula, so that you do not reach the bowels and tear it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	 But if you do not see the anus at the beginning of the opening, then you should gently push into the opening until the anus appears; and then extract it as we have said; and then soak cloths in water and vinegar and place them on the area and secure those with bandages.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	 And sometimes use salt, apply it to the cavity of the opening so that any remaining moisture is absorbed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	 But if an abscess forms in that place, then treat it with heated plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter XI
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	 Of ways of touching the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	 When hairs have grown on the eyelids of the eyes below the natural hairs and have become old, they touch the eye and cause various ailments such as constant tearing and softening of the eyelids, until this causes destruction of the eye, which is called touching of the eye. The cure is done in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or with sharp medicine, as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done by incision and suturing; or with needles, as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	 Therefore, you should place the patient's head on your lap; then turn up the eyelid of the eye with your left hand. And if it is turned up, that is good; and if not, insert a needle in that one which has the hair from the side below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate above, and this should be — close to the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are born — close to the hairs, and pull the thread towards the top with the eyelid, and turn that one up with the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	 And then open the inner part of the eyelid just below the lashes with a spatula touching the lacrimal duct leading to the smaller lacrimal duct; and then extract the pus and place small cotton or cloth particles under the eyelid, and then seal it over the eyelid with a tent, and let it be so as a figure of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	 However, it is necessary that the figure (shape of the myrtle leaf) matches the amount of swelling of the eyelid, for this varies among people. There are those who need a large quantity to be incised from the eyelid, corresponding to the amount by which the eyelid has become softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	 And then open with the spatula along both lines that you have marked, beginning from the larger lacrimal duct towards the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	 And if your incision is near the natural hairs and its thickness is like that of a king (a thick coin or large denomination).
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	 And then place the scalpel in one of the two corners of the incision, and then scrape all of it away, and then join together the two lips with a thin thread or fine wool thread, and cleanse the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous from the threads over two eyebrows with some viscous substance, if you wish to do this, and if not, do nothing.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	 And then release the suture of the thread within three or four days, and then care for that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	 And if you wish, leave the wound without stitching and care for it with something that dries and tightens, because the eyelid is raised due to the scarring of the wound and its adhesion; but stitching is better. Therefore, this is what the ancients said about healing.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	 But nonetheless, be attentive to the patient and it will be a good operation, and there should not be any fear in this regard.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	 And there is another method of treatment, which consists of making on the eyelid a figure like this, similar to a myrtle leaf, and then raise the eyelid with three stitches, separated and gathered in this manner:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 But if this is not possible, hold the stitches and this should not be stitched over. Then take a needle with thread in it and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other end near the larger lacrimal duct, and the other thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust these threads equally between each other, and then with these raise your hand with an even lifting, raising all the skin over which the figure is drawn as we have described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and heal whatever is inside that needs healing.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	 But if an abscess occurs, you should make your incision or opening, and then seal that abscess with a plaster similar to it, and with ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	 And sometimes it is necessary for the eyelid to have its hairs turned inside out, then you should use water as we said of incision; but stitching on each one is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	 To cauterize with reeds is done in this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	 And it is that you turn the eyelid and divide the figure inside according to what I have described; then by skill make two reeds or two thin splints, of which the length should be according to the length of the eyelid and the width according to the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	 And you have already cut at the ends of each divided part where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	 Then add each one with skill over the excess of the eyelid of the eye, and bind the reeds of each divided part with strong tightness, and leave it for a few days, because the skin through the tightness will die and fall off and sink until by itself it falls out.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	 If it is delayed, then break the fast with the tourniquets, and immediately treat the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	 Therefore, once it has hardened, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not hurt (or sting).
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	 And this is how to make two reeds according to this shape/method.
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	 and there should be the exact amount of length and width, neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter .12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	 About plucking stinging hairs in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard (or stiff).
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	 When the hairs are unnatural, hard and rough and stinging in the eyes, then the operation is to take a fine needle and place it on that thread of fine silk and linen, and then you adjust the tips of it [the needle] and knot each one very finely.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	 And let the length of the threads be about a palm in size.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	 And then you make another fine thread underneath it briefly, and tie the ends of that one if you want to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	 And then have the patient place their head in your lap, and let it be near the light so that your work may be seen clearly, because it is a delicate and intricate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	 And then quickly insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs to be removed, and make it penetrate the eyelid swiftly until you pull it out above the natural line of the hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	 And then carefully pull the hair out from its root and insert that into a tweezer, and let there be one or two or three hairs and not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	 And then pull your hand along with it until the hair is removed by the tweezers from the eyelid, following the natural line of the hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	 But if the tweezers are pulled and the hair is not removed, pull the tweezers towards yourself with the thread that you have prepared for this purpose until it is removed from the upper orifice of the tweezers.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	 And check it with the eye's vision, for when you pull out the tweezers and the thread, and both are closed in the eye, leave the stitches for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and new skin grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	 And if the hair is too short, then attach a long natural hair to it and raise it with that one or let it be until it has lengthened enough in some space, and then you raise that one.
Capitol .xiii.	 "Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	 "About the care of and how to treat cataracts that appear on the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	 "When cataract appears in the eye, and it is caused by the contraction of the eyelid when it contracts above, or to the right or left side due to poor healing from a wound or incision or cauterization, and it is called leporine cataract, whether this cataract is natural or accidental, it is caused by poor healing from wounds or incisions or cauterizations, or resembles their unfortunate state.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 "The manner of the operation on it is that you should cut through that poor healing and separate its lips, and place between them a cloth soaked in oil, and bind them together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	 "And it is not appropriate to use for its treatment those things which dry or constrain, because if you do this, the cataract will return worse than before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	 "Use for its treatment those things which soften, such as fenugreek, and boil it with water in which lentils and seeds of linseed are cooked, or make a plaster of diachylon, which should be liquefied with some oil, and dip the cloth into this, and use it for treatment.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	 And the treasure of your care is that you pierce with all ingenuity whatever is not solid according to the form as it was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	 And this operation that we have mentioned is only a certain correction of the halyxocratia, which does not restore the form of the place as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	 Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	 On the care for halyxocratia, which is done in the lower eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	 This halyxocratia that is done in the lower eyelid, which is truly called halyxocratia; and it is of two kinds: one natural, the other accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	 But the accidental kind is caused by a blow, cut, or cautery, or similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	 And the way to perform this operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	 Then extend the flesh on each side with the needle and sew it together with the needle, and cut widely with a broad spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	 And thus if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should, that is good; but if not, take the reed and place it on the split figure, and with that turn the eyelid, and make two slits in the side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	 Based on the context and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	 This is the Greek letter alpha (α).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	 And then cut off that piece of flesh to the extent of the length of his sharp blade below it, which is called the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	 And then adjust the separated parts and suture them with wool thread; and then cure them with the water of mollifying medicines and hot compresses until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	 And if the eyelid must be opened by incision, suture or cautery, then you should make a flat incision along the edge of the eyelid, as previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	 And then separate with a hot compress between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	 In summary of the treatment for eyelid removal whether above or below, let it be performed according to the preparation of the eyelid form, and that is in the form of various spots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	 And the skilled artisans always prepare an ingenious device in every possible way to restore the figure to its natural form or as close as possible to it, and the patient according to what is suitable for them from the operation and the instruments with the greatest convenience.
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	 From the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	 When this consolidation occurs to some men such that the eyelid is fixed above with the white of the eye, and its movement and natural functions are restricted, then you must insert the tip of a ray under the eyelid, lift it up, or extend it with honey.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	 Then you should cut the adhesion with a fine spatula, which is not sharp but slightly obtuse to avoid disturbing the patient during the operation, and leave the spatula so that it does not scratch the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	 And let your cut always drain that adhesion until the eyelid is returned to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	 Then put salt water in the eye with which you wash; or instill in it a solution of boric acid dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	 Then separate the eyelid from the eye with linseed oil, and place over the eye wool soaked in egg white, and on the third day use adhesive bandages until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	 Concerning the ingrown nail and the flesh of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	 You should know that nails come in two types: either they are nervous and resemble hard, subtle ice; or they are not nervous and resemble white, congealed humidity. When the latter touches iron, it must be taken with pincers, cut away, and the pincers should not be placed on it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	 And both types of nails do not begin except in the larger tear duct, which little by little covers the sight and prevents light and eye movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	 But the way to operate for its ingrown is that the patient places his head on your lap, and then you open his eyes, raise the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail with small-bladed pincers and extend it toward the sides above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	 And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair, or something similar, or strong thread, or double the end of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and bind the nail with thread; and extend it toward the sides above, and scrape away the side of the nail that is near the pupil with the hair.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	 And thus you should follow him with your hand into his rear.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	 And then you should incise the remaining part of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and remove the natural tissue of the tear duct so that continuous tearing does not occur due to this incision.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And sometimes the nail with the sole of one's finger or with a thread, as we have said, and then it should be cleansed with a fine spatula, which has this shape:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	 And be careful not to touch the corneal tissue with the spatula and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 After the incision, put a little of crushed salt or sieved ashes into the eye, and let it stay overnight; then cleanse it with water until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	 And if the nail is not inflamed and you cannot insert the needle, or it is stuck in the fingernail, then many times this type of fingernail is cured with medications, and it heals as I have described in the previous section.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	 And if you want to incise it, then you open the eye of the patient and take a fine spatula with a sharp edge like this:
am subtilitat.	 It seems like you want me to continue translating the text line by line as per your previous example. However, the provided sentence "am subtilitat" does not contain a verb or clear context, making it difficult to translate accurately without more information. Could you please provide the full paragraph or additional context for this sentence?
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	 And if you see that it is rarefied and hidden in that reason, then distill from your mouth into the hollow of the head with either cedar oil or rosemary oil or salt water, and close the hollow until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	 Then repeat the operation on it until all of that is removed from him, except if a contrary abscess forms in the hollow, for then you leave it, and treat the abscess first until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	 Then repeat your operation on him with reason until he is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	 The prominence of the tear flesh, if seen in the hollow due to great harm, should be suspended with a hook; and you cut that from that one piece, and do not finish the cutting so that you do not cut flows of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	 Then distill rosemary oil and cedar oil into it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter XVII
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	 On the incision of the almond and of that which is born from flesh adhering to the hollow.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	 Here is the translation of the given text into English:
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	 Based on the provided text and its translation, here's my attempt to translate the given sentence:
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	 And use your incision tool with which you cut those or use a spatula that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or small scissors with which you can trim according to the shape that follows this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 Therefore, once your incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then fill the wound with salt powder or drip onto it powdered vitriol, similar to corrosive medicines, and place over the wound outside a cloth soaked in egg white until it is secured against pus.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	 And if there remains any suspicion of guardians and it is cauterized with blood, and you fear pus, then leave the wound open and treat that pus with water that causes the pus to cease, and then repeat over that area with an operation until it is healed. Similarly, proceed in the same way with the flesh that occurs in the wound of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	 However, you must avoid all treatment of the fresh wound by either natural or accidental means, especially with iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is tolerating this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	 Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	 "Of the collection of sand in the eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	 "The sand comes from veins that are stretched over the eye and prevent the eyelid's movement, thus causing the eye to swell for days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	 "Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider if the eye in which there is sand is strong and has no other ailment than sand. If so, you should remove that sand.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	 "And it is that you instruct the patient to place their head on your lap. Then, suspend those veins with an ounce or two, according to your wisdom; and let that ounce be of fine double silk in this manner:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	 "or let there be two ounces gradually joined into one, like this:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	 "And then those veins should be carefully collected with fine forces, and gently draw the blood little by little, until you see that the veins are removed from the eye and have been turned back.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	 "And take care not to touch the eye with the ends of the spatula; and if your operation is at midday before the sun, be very steady in your work so that you only incise those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	 "And when you have finished, then you should drop clear vinegar or rose water onto the eye, so that with its sharpness it may dissolve and remove what remains of the sand.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 Here is the line-by-line translation of the given text:
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	 And proceed with the treatment in the same manner until he is cured.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	 Here is the form of the forceps.
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter XIX
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	 Of the reduction of hernias in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	 When you treat hernias with a cautery or sharp medicine, if it is preceded by the narrative of them not being cured, then do not cut into it but rather make incisions over the abscess until its maturity is achieved, and extract all the moisture within it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And then, when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, you should scrape it with an instrument whose form is this:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	 It is named "rasp head" and should be made of iron, with a rounded head like an axe, which should be made pointed by filing or fine filing (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	 And place that [rasp] on the corrupt part of the bone, and then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped off.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	 And this should be done several times, and then restore the place with drying and astringent remedies.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	 Let's break down the sentence into its components and translate it line by line:
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	 And if so, then it is not in his power to do anything but reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and in this manner: and it is that you expose with either iron or sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then you take three [pieces?] like this form.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	 Let the extremity of it be made triangular, and its shaft be first thinned to the extremity in this manner as you see thus.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	 Then place that [triangular extremity] over the bone, and it should be close to the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little toward the cheek, and then turn your hand with the three [pieces?] into it until it penetrates all the bone, and the patient will feel this as something comes out when you take your hand away.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	 Therefore, at that point restore the area with astringent medicines to dry it as you have been shown.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	 Therefore, when the flesh and area have healed, then the matter that was spreading to other parts outside returns to the nose, so this is easier for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	 Chapter 20
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	 On the reduction of the swelling of the cheek
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	 When the cheek swells to its full extent and no injury or diminution occurs in the vision, then you should let the patient lie down, and follow him, and place cupping glasses on the neck without scarification, and suck well; and then place on the cheek a liniment that is made from acacia and aloe and sesame seed oil and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster on the cheek with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	 The method for creating poultices is as follows: take strips of linen cloth and fold each strip into four layers, then make them into packages (or bundles).
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	 Then place one bundle on top of the other according to the amount of swelling that is present.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	 Then press firmly on the bundles with a strong, thick cloth; and apply the cupping glasses with suction without making incisions; then remove the cups and let the swelling subside day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	 But if during this time the ligament has softened, it should be very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	 And then remove the ligature day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	 And if you see that the swelling has already been reduced, that is good; but if not, then repeat the poultices with the bundles and the ligature and the cups until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	 About the incision of the elevated part of the choroid.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	 When there is a rupture in the choroid and it protrudes out of the eyelids like a grain of sand, and its shape resembles that of a man, if you wish to incise it, then perform the operation as follows: insert one needle from below into the base of the choroid, and another from above into the lacrimal part; make the upper needle penetrate and leave the lower needle in place according to its position; then incise the location of the double thread and lift with it the protruding part of the choroid around the needle, and press it firmly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	 And then extract the needle and place over the wound a cloth soaked in egg white, and let it stay until the thread enters with the skin.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 And then cure the wound with water that will comfort it until the injury is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	 And sometimes apply throughout with a circular cloth over the wound, making a large mound, and then perforate it with a thin spatula that reaches the bottom of the wound, allowing the moisture to drain out, and then descending the swelling and re-entering promptly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	 And then strengthen [the area] until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter .22
De curacio de alconati.	 On the treatment of cataracts.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	 This disease called cataract is not anything but a thin membrane that is placed in the wound like descending water, and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	 But the way to treat it is to make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take their head in both your hands from two sides, so that you see the thin membrane approaching the edges, and then dry it out so that it does not descend, and stop the light, and the patient will see the causes just as they were seen.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	 And if it does not go down, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	 And if the descent is not prepared with water as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and immediately take a thin spatula and apply it over the skin next to the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunica in the crown (in the appropriate place), until the humors are expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	 Therefore, when it is expelled, then pour hot water into the nostril in which you have mixed honey or in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 And immediately treat it with the other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	 On the treatment of water coming out of the nostril.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	 As we have said in the division, there are different types of water and which one is suitable for piercing with a needle, as will be declared. Therefore, according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	 Then you should make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie his nose tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	 And immediately place your left hand near the eyelid of the affected nostril if the water is in the left nostril; or with your right hand if it is in the right nostril.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	 "And then with your right hand take almagda, if the wound is on the left; or with your left hand, if the wound is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	 "And then place the tip of almagda near the crown for the thickness of the hair in the wound, and then peel off almagda with virtue and roll your hand with it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	 "And then penetrate into the wound and feel that almagda has already arrived at its intended location.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	 "And it should be that the measure of the path of almagda to the stone is equal to the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black, and it is the crown of the wound; for you will see with that pupil the vision of the wound through the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	 "And then place almagda in the location where there is water, and then you throw it down once, or twice, and if the water descends quickly, then have the patient look at that upon which he restores his vision quickly, and almagda in its hole.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	 "And then wait a little while; and if the water has descended, then you place that other time before almagda is thrown out.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	 Sure, let's translate the provided text line by line:
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	 But we and those of our time pause upon that which is called triac in Latin with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if you do not obey your doctor in the treatment of the eye due to its hardness — for there are some men whose eyes are very hard —, then it is necessary that you take the ointment called albedo, which has this form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	 And therefore pierce that joint with it, and do not put your hand into the hole, but only make a way for the doctor's subtle touch.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	 Then immediately intervene as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	 And you must complete your work by preparing a quiet sleeping place for the patient, where they can sleep on their back in a dark room. All movement should be forbidden.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	 And let the patient's nature remain undisturbed so that their condition may improve, and do not move their head to the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	 And let the bandage be applied according to its disposition for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	 And then uncover the patient in that dark room and test their vision by showing them some objects. Then return the bandage for seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	 It is not necessary to do this during the hour of the cure, or immediately after the injection.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	 "You must remove this because water can easily be moved by a strong and powerful gaze.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	 "But if you encounter an abscess, it is necessary to open the head of the abscess before the seventh day, and then irrigate it with water that reduces swelling.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	 "Then you should close the patient's eyes and place a cloth over their face to help regulate their vision for several days, keeping them in a dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	 "And then gradually lead the patient out of that darkness and have them converse about their causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	 "And know that in the operation, the student is not exempt from some vision, so you should be confident about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	 "And it has come to our attention from some of those who are in the art, and one said that they made fire in the Airac area with a needle through which water was drawn.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	 "However, I have not seen anyone in our land who has accomplished this, nor is it written about in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	 "And these are the types of needles that should be used for those who do not know about them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	 And they should be made of iron or steel properly, and their tips should have this subtle triangular shape, with the pointed end like this is the shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	 Chapter .24
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	 About the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	 When in the nose there are born various growths of flesh, one of which is caused by a stinging motive similar to that of scorpion bites or polyps; and this illness is called polyp because it resembles that fish.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	 And its flesh is cancerous, scaly, of dark color; and it is the flesh of a lion, not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	 Therefore, in the case of this flesh that is not fraudulent or cancerous, it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands and place him in the sun, and open his nostrils, and prick your finger in those fleshes.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	 Then extract that from the outside parts, and then cut what you have understood of those with a sharp, subtle spatula from one part into another until you know that all the flesh has already been removed; because if any remains of it for some reason by which excision is possible, then you should scrape it with one of the subtle instruments with ease until nothing remains of it.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	 Based on the pattern you've provided and my understanding of medieval medical texts, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	 And then place some grease and water or wine in the nose.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	 But if the nose is open and moisture enters the palate, then know that he is already cured.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	 But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh rotting in the upper part of the nose bones to which the corruption has not yet reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	 Therefore, it is necessary to introduce fat into him, which has some thickness, and place in it as many wicks as possible, and put between each wick the quantity of a finger or less, and have the patient lie down and insert one end of the wick into the nose with a reed or another means that is available to him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	 And after doing this, let him blow his breath so that it reaches the nasal passages and comes out through his throat, because many times children in schools do something similar to this action, and it is an easy task for those who wish to perform it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	 Then place the two ends of the wick, one end sticking out from the nose and the other remaining in the nose, and then administer a meat clamp with the wicks that are in the wick, and do this until you know that the meat is already with the wicks of the wick.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	 And immediately extract the bile, and place a cupping glass on the nose to draw out the blood, and do this for three days or more until the ointment dissolves all that is softened of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	 And at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	 But if the course of treatment requires drying, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	 And this is the design of the instrument used by the master purger to distill oils and medicines into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	 And make it of silver or brass, which should be similar to a small open lamp with a small cup, and the opening likewise.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	 And if you wish, make a closed tube similar to a reed, and the nozzle of the master purger's instrument should be flat and open; on the back of it there should be a handle with which you can hold it when you pour oil or water into it from the juices and suckable causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	 And these master purgers are precious: take castor bean, white helebore, ginger, and saffron crocus, long pepper, scammon, and ephedra, each an ounce. Mix with juice of lettuce and cabbage, make them into pills, dissolve a pill in warm water, and pour it into the nostrils of the patient who is lying down.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter XXV
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	 About warts that are born in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	 It is often seen that warts are born in the extremities of the nose, and it is said that on certain days, when the moon is in a specific position, one should pay attention to them.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	 And for this reason, you must observe it at the beginning of its appearance and record everything about it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	 Then place on the area either a cautery or a medicine that burns in the same location.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	 However, if you observe it too late after it has grown, then consider whether it is hardened, firm, dark in color and painless. If so, do not touch it with iron, because it is a cancerous abscess; for often those who observe this abscess suffer great harm from it. iety
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	 And if the abscess is soft to the touch and not dark in color, and it is possible to observe it in all cases, then evacuate the patient and observe it without fear, and treat the area with a drying and constricting agent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter XXVI
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	 On the suture of the nose and lips, and the earlobe when continuity is broken by wound or injury.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	 "Know that when there is a break in continuity of one of these ligaments, few people are helped by this operation.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "Therefore, when someone has any of those causes, consider if it is a fresh wound with its blood, and then you should join the two lips of the wound with stitches, and then cure it until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	 "And if the lips of the broken continuity are already separated, and each is healthy, then you should scrape off each part of its cord until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 "Then join the two lips with stitches and strengthen them, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and trass on top of them, and place on the powder a thin paste of emplaster or any other of the consolidating pastes, and let it lie for two days or three, and then remove that and replace that plaster and let it lie until the threads are dissolved by themselves, and then cure with ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	 "But the manner of suturing is that you either bring together the break in continuity with needles as we have described in the suturing of the abdomen, or bring together the break in continuity with thread as has been taught to you.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	 On the causes that come in the two lips on the inside parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	 Many times men see in the inside parts of their lips some hard swellings similar to goose fat, and some are smaller while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	 Therefore, it is necessary to turn the lips and folds each of those hard parts, and then absolve the area with crushed sage until the blood has been drawn out, and then wash with vinegar and cure the area with water that is astringent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	 On the incision of hardened flesh on the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	 Very often people see hardened flesh on the gums, which the ancients called albulus. Therefore, you should suspend it with a hook or whatever you have with your scissors and incise it to its root, and let the pus run out or the blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	 And then place on the area crushed sage or other astringent or absorbent powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	 And if that flesh returns, then incise it again and cauterize it, because after the cautery it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	 **Chapter 29**
De razo de dentz am ferr.	 About toothache with fever.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	 When the surfaces of the teeth, both inside and out, and between the gums are filled with rough, hard, sometimes dark scales that turn yellow or green, and corruption comes to the gums through these, then the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	 And so it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and place his head on your chest, then scrape the teeth where these scales appear with a tool resembling sand until none of their causes remain, which will remove the blackness and yellowness and other problems until they are cleaned.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	 If this removes what was at the beginning of the ailment, that is good; if not, then you repeat the treatment on those teeth on the second day and the third and the fourth until it reaches its final conclusion as you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	 And know that teeth require many scrapers of various shapes and forms according to how your operation is prepared.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	 And for this reason, the scraper with which the inside part of the tooth is scraped is different from the scraper used between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of scrapers you must prepare as you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	 Certainly! Please provide me with the first line from the medieval medical treatise that you would like translated into English.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	 "On the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	 "Be sure to cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and delay the extraction as much as possible, because there is no substitute for it once it has been removed, since it is a vital substance until the time of its removal.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	 "However, when the patient insists on having that tooth extracted, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, because often the pain deceives the patient and he believes it to be in a healthy tooth. And if you extract that one, then the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been removed, for we have seen this happen through the operations of fools.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	 "Therefore, as you must be certain which is the painful tooth and know it well, then you should scarify around the circumference of the tooth with a spatula that has some virtue in it, until it is dissolved from the gum on all sides, and afterwards rinse it with the aforementioned substances, or with fine forceps little by little at the beginning until you have loosened it.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	 "And then place strong pliers in his mouth for good speech or powerful extraction, and position the patient's head between your legs so that you have a firm grip and it does not slip out. Then draw the tooth with straight movements so that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	 And so if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it under the patient in such a way that it can be easily and forcefully removed from them as was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	 But if the tooth is broken or decayed, then you must fill that cavity with cloth and secure it with a thin thread to prevent it from breaking during your manipulation with tongs.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	 And it is necessary that you work very carefully with scarification around the entire edge of the gum and be careful not to break or damage it, and return to the patient because the pain will be worse than before.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	 And beware of doing what some ignorant barbers do in their ignorance and audacity regarding tooth extraction, without administering the remedies we have recommended; for many times they bring upon sick men great evils which are more difficult to heal, and all or some of their roots, or that you extract it along with some bones from the jaw as has happened many times.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	 And after the tooth is extracted, rinse the mouth with hot water or vinegar with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	 And if there should be blood flow through this, similar to numerous views, then take some amount of egg and sprinkle it on the wound, and if that does not work, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	 And the shape of the forceps and fine pincers with which you begin to extract the tooth should be of a long handle, short shaft, and thick, so that they are not bent when you need to use them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	 And in this way, with a thick handle until they are not bent when tightened, they should have a short tip.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	 And they should be made of Indian iron with straight tips, and at the ends of these there should be teeth that interlock with each other and hold firmly by constriction, and sometimes the tips of these are in the shape of the beak of a bird called a stork, which is wide, and they have strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	 On the extraction of teeth and the removal of bones from fractured jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	 When you need to extract a tooth that is broken, there are some reasons for this. Then you should place a cotton pad with border over the area for one day or two until the area becomes soft; and then introduce tweezers or pincers, the tips of which resemble the beak of a bird called a stork or spoonbill, in the shape of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	 Based on the context of a medieval medical treatise and the similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	 And if the patient does not obediently present with these forceps or clamps, then it is necessary for you to cut through the anus and strip away all the flesh, and insert the instrument called atali, which is a small pincer of this form:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 And it should be of short length, rather thick, and not pointed to prevent tearing.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	 Therefore, if the anus is thus pierced, it is good; but if not, assist yourself with these other instruments whose forms are as follows: The form of the first instrument is a triangular tip with some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	 The form of the second instrument is to have a triangular and more delicate tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	 And already assisted with this instrument, which has two branches like this:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	 and with other instruments which I will describe later for the extraction of teeth; because first it is done with this instrument which resembles a large thorn, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 With a twisted or short triangular tip that has some thickness and is not pointed to prevent tearing.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	 And know that the tooth extraction instruments are similar in shape and function to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	 This sentence seems to discuss the skill and knowledge of medical practitioners in diagnosing and treating various ailments that ancient physicians may not have specifically addressed or treated with particular instruments. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Here's my translation of the given text:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	 And if there is any swelling in the patient, reduce it little by little, and hold it with your mouth to prevent it from spreading or escaping until the entire bone is healed; then restore the area with suitable medicine for this purpose.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if there is a small sore on the bone, then scrape off that sore and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	 This indicates that the text is divided into sections or chapters, with this being the 32nd chapter. The word "Capitol" in this context is likely a typo or variation of the more common term "Chapter".
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	 Chapter 32: On the care of protruding teeth.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	 When teeth protrude from the body unnaturally due to their shape, and especially when this occurs in women, particularly elderly venerable ones, you should consider: if one tooth is very close to another and cannot be extracted or straightened, then file it down; but if it is not attached to any other tooth, then cut it off with this instrument whose form is like a pig's snout, and it should be made of Indian steel with a very sharp point.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	 And your cutting should be done with the instrument with which you cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that no other tooth is damaged in the process.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "And if there is an eminent tooth that needs filing down, then file it with an Indian steel file, which looks like this.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	 "And let all of it be made of Indian steel; and it should have many small points like a file used for making needles. With this, the tooth should be filed little by little over several days with gentleness, so that no other tooth is damaged or lost.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	 "Then polish it at the end, and rinse it with hot water.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	 "And if it is a tooth from which part of the surface has broken off and the tongue is touching it, then you should file that area until the roughness of that part is removed and smoothed out, and filled in so that the tongue does not touch it and speech is not impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter 33
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	 "On the restoration of damaged teeth with a gold or silver filling.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	 "When the front teeth have been dislodged or displaced by impact or falling, and the patient cannot chew food, and you have treated them with astringent medicines, but your treatment has not worked, then to prevent them from falling out, insert gold fillings into those teeth. Do not use silver, because silver turns black and softens over time, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	 Sure, here's the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	 And then proceed with the suturing inside the area where you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not weakened.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	 And be sure that the thread with which you reinforce the stitches must pass between the teeth so that they do not become loose.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	 And then cut off the excess thread with scissors or forceps, and gather those ends in each place with skill, and turn them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the broken tooth, so that they do not cause damage to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	 And then let it lie thus tightly as it should be.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	 However, if it is loosened or broken, reinforce that or those with another thread in the same manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	 And this is the way of the teeth and the figure of the suture of two healthy teeth and two broken teeth, as you see these tied together.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	 And when one or two teeth are returned to their place, then make each of them fit well in their respective locations, and let them grow as we have said, so that they may strengthen.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	 And do not do this except with good craftsmanship and skill.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	 And sometimes a cause related to the bones of a cow is used, and it is made from them in the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is lacking, and it is strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves with that for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	 About the cause of the lesion that occurs on the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	 This lesion that occurs under the tongue sometimes is natural with which one is born, or it may be accidental and occur due to a healed wound.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	 And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the patient, with his head fixed to your side; and raise his tongue, and then carefully cut that nerve lesion as much as necessary until the tongue is released from its stiffness.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	 But if there is any hardness or knotting in it, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you should apply oil and cut it as much as necessary until you have completely severed the lesion and the knot has been dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	 And be careful not to make a fissure in the thickness of the flesh, and that you do not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	 Here's the translation of the provided sentence:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	 Sure! Here's the translation of the given text:
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 And then that care with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	 Of the removal of a ranula from under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	 Sometimes an abscess resembling a small tumor forms under the tongue, preventing it from functioning naturally; and it quickly grows until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	 And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the patient sitting in front of the sun and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	 And if you see it is black or dark in color, hard, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 And if it has a whitish color, indicating moisture, then you insert the scalpel into it and cut it with a fine spatula, cutting it from all sides; and if blood comes out during your operation, then you place a cloth soaked in vinegar on top, which is vitriol, to stop the bleeding.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 And then return to your work until you have removed it completely, until it has been washed with vinegar and salt; and care for that with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 This seems to be indicating that we are starting Chapter 36 of the treatise. Without more context, it's difficult to provide a line-by-line translation as there is only one sentence here. However, based on the pattern seen in the previous text, "Capitol .xxxvi." likely means "Chapter 36" or "Section 36".
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	 Sure, let's translate this line by line:
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	 When swelling occurs in the throat glands, which resemble cotton and appear externally, these are called tonsils. If you treat them with the water we mentioned in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, and causes little pain. In that case, do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	 And if it is of red color and the root is large, do not touch it with iron because of the blood flow; rather, let it mature inside first. Then either you will pierce it, or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	 And if it is of white color, red, and the root of it is thin, then that is what needs to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And the operation on it is what you should consider before your operation, whether the abscess has already subsided from the cautery with complete rest or if it has diminished somewhat; and then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head be in your lap, and open his mouth, and the servant taking between his hands presses the tongue downwards with a very noble instrument, of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	 And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	 Sure, I'd be happy to help translate this sentence:
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if something is causing inflammation of the tissues, then proceed with an instrument that looks like this:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	 and it resembles forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each is in the inside of the other, very sharp, and made of iron that has been hardened.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	 But if this instrument is not available to you, then proceed with a spatula that looks like this: and let one end be sharp while the other is not.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	 And after you have made an incision on one side, make another incision on the other side in the same manner, and then the patient will be healed of cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 But if there is bleeding, heal with water from the decoction of pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves and similar to that of hemostatic causes until the bleeding has stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	 And sometimes this occurs in the groin area, other times in the form of abscesses or both ears, and cut them in the same way as I have said for the incision of two holes.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	 Based on the given text and patterns, here's my translation of the sentence:
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	 "And the abscess had grown so large that after two months it would burst through two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	 "So I punctured it carefully and inserted one of their needles into the opening, and pulled out some of that large amount of pus. Then I incised that area where the other opening was located, and closed his mouth, pressed his tongue, and then I inserted another needle into that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	 "And then I incised a large part of it, and there was only a little blood coming out from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	 "So it is certain that this woman is cured, and she immediately began to drink water, and then eat food. Because I did not stop incising that abscess many times for a long time, and another abscess formed in place of the first one, which was incised until it extended.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	 "So I applied ointment and cauterized the wound, and after that it healed; and then I walked around and did not know what God had done for this patient.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter .xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	 About incising an umbilical hernia when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	 When they say catarrh is present in the uvula, and it is persistent and prolonged, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is located in the throat, large and round, then it is called a bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	 But when it is treated with the water we mentioned earlier in the division, and your treatment does not help, and likewise if the abscess has already been removed from him and is subtle, then you should insert that which is round; and if it is to that length, and is bloody, of a dark or black color, and it is not at all painful, then you should attempt the incision of it, because in this there is danger for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	 And when you see it according to the manner I have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit up and press his tongue with the instrument that suits this form, and then place the nail on the gum, and pull it down and incise it with one of the two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two molars.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	 And you must not incise it unless it is adjusted on the natural limit without addition, because if you incise more than that, you will impede his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 And then, at the incision, use what we have recommended in the treatment of two ailments, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 But if the patient is frightened by the incision, you must use ingenuity in cauterizing them without fear. The manner of cauterization should only be with sharp water, and you should place the patient's head on your lap. Then press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier, and then take some of the water we have described in the chapter on cauterization, and make a living wound with it. Place it not too thick or thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument, which has this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	 Let the patient's mouth be in a state of concavity where the medicine is placed, like the concavity of a spoon. Place the instrument with the medicine on the lips, and have the patient spit out over their own chest so that any saliva or mucus from that mouth does not escape onto the throat and cause burning.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	 Then take your hand with the medicine and press it onto the uvula for about half an hour until you see that it has become darkened and soothed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	 Based on the given context and the language similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, I'll attempt to translate the sentence line by line:
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	 Sure, let's translate the given sentence line by line:
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	 And this type of treatment is more secure than caution and longer lasting.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	 Sometimes the uvula is cured with water that is more delicate than cautery and incision, because it is treated with sublimation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, dried arabic dates, camomile, and similar herbs, and prepare all these ingredients or some of them in an earthenware pot. They should be soaked in vinegar, then boiled; and the pot should be well-stoppered with a proper stopper, with a hole in the middle of the pot over which an appropriate concave instrument of silver or iron is placed.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	 And the end should be inserted into the patient's mouth until the steam reaches the uvula through the hole, until the uvula is very much darkened.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	 And repeat this process several times until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the onset of abscesses, for it may cause too much swelling in the abscess, and you should not do this unless you are certain that there is no abscess present.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	 If the instrument is not present with you, then take a reed and attach to its end a piece of eggshell, so that the patient's mouth may be covered, because the shell of the egg prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	 And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Chapter 38
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	 Of the extraction of thorns and water that stick in the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	 Many small seeds stick in the throat, or a thorn from a pea, or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	 Then it is necessary for you to extract that which is visible from those things, on which the sight falls, since you press the tongue with an instrument in front of it, so that what is in the throat may be revealed to you.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	 And that which is not apparent and hidden in the throat, it is necessary for you to make the patient vomit before the food has descended into the stomach, because the cause connected to the throat will be expelled by vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of onion or radish of lettuce or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge and bind it very strongly with honey, and then let the patient swallow it, because when it reaches the place where the thorns are, they will be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	 And take an eel and have it bound with a thread, and let it be inside the meal, and afterward it should be extracted; or take a leek and put it inside the meal, and afterward remove it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	 And if those causes which we mentioned are not forgotten, then use an instrument of lead in this manner:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	 And it should be a bit thicker than a small ray (fish), and at its end there should be a cavity into which you can easily insert the patient's tongue.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	 And let the patient have their head raised up, and be careful that the touch of their throat bone does not cause them discomfort or that it pulls out a bone or spine, or that the doctor with his hand causes an injury.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	 However, it is better that the patient who is being treated enters the instrument themselves, due to their knowledge of the location and cause, and that they push down and pull up the hand with the instrument until everything prepared inside is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	 Chapter 39
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	 On the removal of leeches attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	 When treating a leech with the methods mentioned in the division of treatment with medicines and not with cauterization, look then at the patient's throat under the light, after you have pressed their tongue with the instrument that we have recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	 Therefore, if you see a leech, remove it with a small onyx or a delicate fine instrument.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	 And if it is not possible to remove the leech with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's vein, and then place an ignited iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the leech dies and leaves the vein) and let the patient abstain from water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	 Then take a bowl full of cold water and open the patient's mouth into it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let any reason cause you to drink from that and stir the water for an hour with your hand, because the leech dies as soon as it feels the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	 But if it has not been removed with the water we recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida through the instrument we recommended for uvula fumigation.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	 Do this, whether it works or not.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	 Another method of operation in fumigation is this: you take a container in which there are burning coals and the container is covered with a cover in the middle of which there is a hole; and the end of the instrument is placed in that hole; then put the fumigation above; and let the patient place their mouth on the end of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not wasted until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech, because the leech will fall off immediately.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	 And if it does not improve, then you should repeat the fumigation many times, and make sure the patient abstains from drinking, but instead eats salty and raw foods, and does not drink water. This treatment is necessary to ensure the condition is forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	 And this is the form of the instrument used to draw blood from the gouty area when it is visible; and it resembles forceps as you see them, except that there is some curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	 which should be placed on the gouty area, and its extremity resembles the beak of a stork, which is rounded, in which there are ridges made by a file, so that when any obstacle is encountered, it does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	 Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	 In which is the summary of the speech on the opening of abscesses and their sectioning.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	 Abscesses are many kinds, in many ways, as will be remembered later, each of which is described in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	 And they are different in their opening and sectioning in two ways, one of which is according to the kind of abscess itself; and the other according to the humors that we find within them.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	 And the second manner is specific to the places where it occurs in the body, because the abscess that occurs in the head is different from the abscess that occurs in the buttocks; and the abscess that occurs in a fleshy area is different from the abscess that occurs in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment according to their location.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	 And moreover, there are some abscesses that should not be perforated until the pus within them has matured or their contents have become solid.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	 Some abscesses should be opened when they are still fresh and not fully matured, such as those located near the joints, for an abscess close to a joint can prolong its existence until it spreads into the surrounding area, causing the ligaments or nerves of that joint to become severely corrupted. This can lead to contraction of that limb; or it may be an abscess near a main organ, and if you delay perforating it until it is fully matured, it could cause damage to the main organ; or it may be near the buttocks, in which case you should not perforate it when it is still crude and not fully digested, except for those located near the buttocks, so that its pus does not spread and extend to the inner parts of the buttocks, creating a fistula, or so that something may be done at its border that cannot heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	 But you should know the time of the pus-filled abscess puncture, and that is when it has ripened.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	 And know that it is ripened when there is the cessation of pain and fever, and also the reduction of redness and pulse, and the sharpness of the abscess head, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	 And because you should know that the puncture should be done in the lower part of the abscess, and from there will come the pus as a result of the treatment.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	 And the puncture should always be done along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the palms of the hands or soles of the feet, and in the places of the tendons, cords of the nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	 But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave the puncture of it until its digestion is confirmed according to what we have said; because if you puncture before that, the body of the pus and a lot of filth will be prolonged, and will greatly harden the lips of it and its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	 And it is necessary that you administer a small puncture, and in large abscesses a large and wide incision or multiple cuts, according to the varying size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	 And there are other types of abscesses in which it is necessary that the scoop be concave and incised, when it is done this way like a bread roll and it is done at a time when it already stinks, as happens with cases of carbuncles and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	 And of these are those that are incised with a cut having three angles; and among them is the one in which it is incised as if with a figure of myrtle leaf, such as the abscesses of the tonsils.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	 And among them are those in which a round cut and a crescent-shaped cut are administered, similar to these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	 But the one in which there is no head as in these superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you puncture it with a superficial or flat puncture only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	 And it is necessary that when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you puncture it and do not worry about extracting all of the matter at once; having extracted a portion from it, close the abscess again the next day, and then extract a larger portion, and repeat this several times according to the degree until it is completely emptied.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	 Sure, I'll give it a try:
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	 Based on the given text and its translation, here's a line-by-line interpretation of the provided sentence:
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	 If a flow of blood occurs during your operation, then you should administer cold water and vinegar in which you have soaked a linen cloth, and place that over the area of the bleeding repeatedly.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	 But if the bleeding persists, it is necessary that you administer remedies and powders which have been recommended in many places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	 But if it is in the time of winter, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you should soak powders in vinegar and hot oil, and place them on the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 And if it is in the summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should place powders soaked in water and oil or vinegar and oil on them, and all of this should be cold until the third day, as we have said, and then you should open the abscess, clean it, and administer to it a cure that is suitable for it until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	 And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said about each abscess in what manner is the way of its cure particularly by chapters.
Capitol .xli.	 It seems like you're referring to a medieval medical treatise with a title or chapter number in Roman numerals. The phrase "Capitol .xli." translates to "Chapter 41" or "Section 41". This indicates that the text is divided into sections or chapters, and this is the 41st one. Without additional context or sentences, I can't provide a more detailed translation, but this should give you an idea of how to approach translating similar texts. If you have the content of Chapter 41, I'd be happy to help translate it line by line as well.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	 About the incision of abscesses that appear on the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	 In the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and these are a type of node that contains sheaths within them; and their species are moving.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	 And they emit pus, and those [abscesses] contain moisture similar to linseed.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	 And there are those [abscesses] that contain moisture similar to dust, and resembling them; and there are also those that are stony, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	 And in the incision of all [types], and in the removal of them there is no fear, since their removal does not cause counteraction with archery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	 And the operation in the incision of these is that you probe them with an instrument shaped like this one, which is called an entromes, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	 Because if what it contains is moisture, then incise it with an incision according to its length along the surface in this manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	 And start at the incision from the line of B to the line of G. Once the moisture is evacuated, then you cauterize that area which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause remaining, for if too much remains it returns, so nothing should remain from that.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	 Then you submerge the area in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; fill the wound with it and leave it there for another day, because with water you will corrode all that remains of that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	 Then you repeat the process on that area with Egyptian ointment, second and third times if necessary, until you are confident that no trace of that membrane remains; then heal the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	 And if the abscess contains fatty nodules, then you should incise it in this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	 with an incision in the shape of a cross, and place the concave side between two lips of the incision and scrape it from all sides, and use your strength to extract the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	 But if your bow resists, then do as I have previously told you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	 And similarly, do the same for the abscess that has turned into stone in both cutting and curing, as we have told you; and cutting over a stoned abscess is easier because it contains little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	 And sometimes there are such abscesses that are in the head of some men who have no moisture at all; the cause of which is that I once made an incision over an abscess in the head of an old woman and found the abscess like a dry, rough, white stone, which could not be pierced. If someone were struck with it, they would suffer.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	 But in other cases of abscesses in the head that are not like this one, such as those that come to the heads of children and go into the roots of the ears, you should make an incision over these, but let it be a superficial incision for all of them.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	 And make the puncture of those in their lower part so that the body is relieved of pus at its lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	 Then cure them with water suitable for this purpose.
Capitol .xlii.	 Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	 On the incision of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	 This text appears to be discussing the appearance of certain growths or tumors in various parts of the body. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And so those that occur in the neck, and those that are generated between them, all scrofula of these is within its own proper tunic, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	 And the species of these scrofula are nodules, for among them some are stony, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not obey treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	 Therefore, in that one which you see is of good disposition in the touch, whose color is close to that of the kite, and is increased all over, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not preceded, it is necessary for you to cut this with a superficial incision from above the part below the body along the line from G to B. And scrape that away entirely, and extend the lips of the kite with an ounce or with small onces if you need those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	 And it is more cautious that the vein or nerve not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	 And if the spatula is not very sharp, do not adjust it with your hand, as this may disturb the patient and you might cut something that does not need to be cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery, you would be prevented from continuing your operation. Then press on the wound with crushed vitriol or other powders that stop blood flow, tighten the wound, and let what is inside heal itself until the acuity of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes soft and begins to suppurate.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	 When the blood is cut (or severed).
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	 Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	 And then inquire with your finger whether there is any other cause of the remaining small scrofulas; if so, cut them and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	 And if there is a large vein in the root of the large scrofula, it is better not to cut that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	 Instead, it is better to leave it with a strong double bandage and let it fall off by itself without harming the patient.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	 And then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it (i.e., bandage it).
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	 And if you cut out that entire wart, then it is necessary for you to join together the two lips of the wound and stitch them up immediately so that there remains no excess tissue.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	 But if you see that there remains excess tissue due to the size of the wart, it is necessary for you to understand how to cut out the root of it, extract it, and apply stitches as mentioned before.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And as for the warts that contain moisture, pierce them with a shallow puncture where you see the mature part of it, and place the puncture in such a way that the pus flows out from below, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	 Then apply an ointment similar to the above-mentioned ones to the puncture, so that it dissolves whatever remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	 Then when you see that the wound is already clean, at that time you should treat it with an ointment of flesh-generating properties until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	 Chapter XLIII
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	 Of the incision of the pus pocket in the armpit.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	 The ancients said that this incision should be done in the pus pocket, but I have not seen any man in our land who has done it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	 "And this is the record of those words.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	 "But in men with scrotal hernias, it is necessary to avoid the removal of the testicle, as it cannot be done properly because all the veins and major blood vessels of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	 "But in those who have an abscess caught in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the testicle, it is necessary to use the section of the testicle to avoid the loss that occurs from perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	 "Therefore, when we want to do this, we should incise the testicle below three or four small circles of the testicular circles, with a small section in the middle between two circles for quantity. The section should be done in the cicatrix, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for sectioning because it lacks flesh and its blood vessels are few.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	 "And if the physician is cowardly, he should then extend the throat with an ounce of oil, and immediately cut the throat until it reaches the trachea. However, he should avoid the blood vessels if any of those are encountered.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	 "Then incise the lips as we have described, and it is indicated for the section of the trachea for the flaccidity which is from that exit with what is broken and by the absence of voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	 And let the wound remain open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	 And when the hour has passed in which the piercing was feared, add two lips of the skin of the wound and suture it alone without the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	 Then administer medicines that cause the flesh to grow until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	 And Al-Zahrawi said that the summary of the speech we have reported is nothing more than to see that some of these abscesses have already drained the pus from the patient and the patient has come close to death, and his soul is departed, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the place of the wound for some breaths, and be saved from death. ︎
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 And for this he commanded to let the wound remain open until the evil of the sickness is consumed; and its evil lasts for three days; and then he commanded to suture the wound and heal it until it is cured.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	 And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and stabbed herself in the throat, cutting off part of the trachea; and I was called to her treatment, and found the woman just like someone who is dying, and discovered the wound and found blood coming out of the wound in small amounts.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	 Here's my best attempt at translating the sentence into English:
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	 And do not approach the servant unless she speaks with a hoarse voice, and after some days she will return to her usual state of health.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	 And now I say to you that in the treatment of epilepsy there is nothing to fear.
Capitol .xliv.	 Chapter .44
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	 Of the treatment of an abscess that occurs on the neck outside and is called a hernia of the neck.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	 This abscess named a hernia of the neck is a large abscess according to the body's color, and it is common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	 And it occurs in two ways, for it is either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	 And in the natural way, it is not possible to cure it.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	 And the accidental way is in two forms: one is similar to large knots, and the other form is similar to an abscess caused by a blockage of an artery, and in that case there is danger.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	 And it should not be presumed to cauterize it except in the case where it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And you should approach that and examine it with the said instrument, and if you find it similar to large knots, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you should incise it like knots, and extract it with water that contains pearl barley; but if not, then its entire being must be investigated, and afterward heal the place with healing water until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	 Sure, let's try translating this line by line into English:
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	 "About the incision of the types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	 "There are many types of nodes, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	 "And it is fitting that I also explain the difference between a node and an excrescence when there is doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	 "Therefore, I say that an excrescence is characterized by heat, fever, and severe pain until the boiling of the excess fluid subsides; and it is complete putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	 "But a node is not characterized by heat, fever, or pain; it is like that which is found in the proper place.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	 "And it is according to the color of the body; its beginning is like a grain and it is made thus as a cyst, either larger or smaller, and they are of two types: either they are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 "Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a node, you should investigate it and inquire about its beginning with an instrument called a probe, as will be explained in the chapter that follows.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	 "And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, which is that you take this instrument and insert it into the moistest part that you find in the abscess; and you will turn the aforementioned parts little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the cord.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	 Based on the context and the pattern of the previous translations, here's a possible translation:
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	 And if watery discharge has been forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you should incise with a shallow cut according to what I have said in other cases.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	 And if there is no moisture from the discharge, know that it is greasy.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	 Dry it with a dry cut, having the shape of a cross in this manner:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	 Just as you have been taught, and suspend it with a hook, and carefully skin the rope from all parts, and save the fur or bag, if possible, on that, and draw out that corruption with a noose.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	 But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that corruption, and many times it happens this way, and then you should extract it by force until nothing remains from it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	 Because if any cause remains, little or a lot, the knot will return according to the greatest amount.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And if you see that any small part remains, then fill the wound with some sharp and corrosive powders and tighten the wound, and place on it a cautery as in the case of an abscess, and treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	 And if the knot is large, then sew the two lips of it and treat it with astringent water.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	 Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Capitol .xlvi.	 I apologize, but it seems that you haven't provided the next line of the text for translation. Please provide the next line so that I can continue with the translation.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	 About the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	 Of these, there are three types of instruments: a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	 The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	 The form of the medium-sized instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	 The form of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	 They are made of iron, with sharpened points, so that they fit well into the openings.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	 And these are the forms of the probes, which are called albedo, and one of them is called veriga.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	 And there are three types: a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	 The form of the large probe is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	 The form of the medium-sized probe is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	 The form of the small probe is this:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	 It is necessary that they be used for openings, exits, fistulas and abscesses, which are caused by bones or other reasons.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	 And they are made rounded, large, long, like big needles with which the skins are sewn together, and they are made of citron wood or wood or iron or silver, and the best ones are when they are made of citron wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	 And the experiment with black feathers is done, which indicates that through them the fistulas in the cavities they reflect should be opened, and they should be reflected with their lightness with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	 And there are three types of them, some are long, others medium, and others short, depending on the width of the fistula and its narrowness.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	 "Form of the great experiment with lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	 "Form of the medium experiment with lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	 "Form of the small experiment with lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	 The forms of the needles are of many kinds, for some are simple, having only one curve, and there are three types: long, short, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	 And they are hollow, and there are three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 And some of them have two curves, and there are three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 And they have three curves, and there are three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	 And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	 "Form of a large simple needle, its form:
Forma de unci simple migier:	 "Form of a medium-sized simple needle:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	 "Form of a small simple needle, its form:
Forma de unci orp gran:	 "Form of a large hollow needle:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	 The text you've provided seems to be a medieval medical treatise written in an archaic form of Spanish or Catalan. Let's translate it line by line:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	 Based on the pattern and context of the previous translations, here's a possible translation for the given line:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	 This appears to be discussing the "form of large blisters having two curves." Here's a possible translation:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	 Form of anointing oil having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	 Shape of some ointment that has two curves.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	 Shape of great ointment which has three curves.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	 The form of anointing oil having three curves.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	 The shape of little ointment that has three curves.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	 And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and there are three types: great, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	 The form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	 The shape of the medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	 The shape of the small scalpel.
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	 The tips of these (scalpels) with which the incision is made are sharp and the other tips are not sharp, and they are not positioned in such a way that during the scraping of the nodes there is fear of incising a vein or nerve, and through these, the patient is healed and finds some tranquility for a while due to the heat that follows the scraping of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	 And these are the forms of cupping glasses, and there are three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	 The form of great madness:
Forma de magda migier:	 It seems like there might be a mistake in your text. "magda" is not a word in any of the Romance languages or Latin, and "migier" doesn't seem to fit with the context of medical treatises. If you can provide the original text again, I'd be happy to help translate it accurately.
Forma de magda pauc:	 It appears that there is a typo or an unfamiliar term in your sentence. "magda" and "pauc" do not appear to be standard terms in medieval medical texts written in Latin, Italian, Spanish, French, or other Romance languages. Please provide the original text again so I can assist you accurately.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	 Here's a possible translation for the sentence:
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	 E si en la extremidad lateral se ha hecho una punción con un espátula escondida y en ella corre la sangre hacia dentro y hacia fuera, cuando lo desees, hazlo así como las veces anteriores.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	 "Los espacios, que son escondidos entre las mencionadas [partes del cuerpo], permiten la perforación de los abscesos y no dañan a los enfermos, y hay tres tipos: grande, mediano y pequeño.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	 "Estas son las formas de esos [espacios]:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	 "Las formas de las ventosas con las que se corta el flujo de la sangre son de tres tipos: grandes, medianas y pequeñas. Las formas de ellas son:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	 "Deben estar hechas de metal, redondas y con cierta longitud, y deben ser delgadas.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	 "Y es necesario que estos tres tipos de ventosas (grandes, medianas y pequeñas) se utilicen para cortar rápidamente el flujo de sangre en casos de emergencia, y cuando primero no sea necesaria la medicina.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	 "Sin embargo, no uses esas para cortar la sangre en cualquier parte del cuerpo; úsalo solo en áreas de carne, como en los muslos de las piernas y las caderas, y en los músculos de los brazos, pechos y abdomen, así como en los muslos carnosos de las piernas.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	 And sometimes these instruments are made from small scraps resembling surgical scissors according to this form; through which the blood is cut when it is done by phlebotomy or incision of a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	 And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter XLVII
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	 Of the care for men's breasts, which resemble women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	 Sometimes the breasts of certain men become swollen at the beginning of sleep, and then the breasts are swollen, resembling women's breasts, and they hang down, like pendulums.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And for the one who has this condition, it is necessary to incise those [breasts] with a lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G. Then drain all the pus and fill the wound with an encarnative medicament, then sew up the two lips of the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 But if the breast sinks downward and becomes soft due to its size, just as it should in women, then it should be cut into two halves above, with two lunar-shaped incisions, each of which is contained within the other at its end, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from line B to line G. Then drain the cord that is between the two lips of the wound, remove the fatty tissue, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary for healing until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of blood, then fill the wound with a cloth soaked in corrosive ointment and let it sit until it has corroded through the flesh, and then treat the area that has been healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	 Chapter .48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	 Concerning the perforation of abscesses that come under the nipple.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	 These abscesses that form under the nipple are of the kind called scrofulous, hard, and contain a bag of pus.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	 And of these, some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line .G. to the line .B. And when all that is in the abscess has been evacuated through the incision, then fill it with old cloth and let it sit overnight.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	 Then remove the cloth and treat the area with appropriate ointment until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	 And if the abscess is of the kind that forms nodes or scrofula, then incise it in the same manner as we have said concerning the section on scrofula likewise.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	 If the wound is spread such that it causes rotting, then administer on him cautery as we have said before.
Capitol .xlix.	 Chapter .49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	 About the incision of abscesses that occur due to an arrow or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	 When the arrow is broken and the cord attached to it has hardened, an abscess often occurs. And the signs by which one knows that inflammation or abscess are due to an artery or vein: for when the abscess is due to an arrow, it is long in the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a hissing sound in him.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	 And that which is due to a vein is round and prominent on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	 And incision on this abscess is harmful, especially in those below the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is at the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	 But on that which is due to inflammation of the orifice of the arrow, make a section in the cord in the length; and then widen the section with hooks near the arrow, and free the tunic until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	 Here's the translation for the given sentence:
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	 And then puncture the area between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood drains out and the abscess is resolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 And then apply a treatment to the location where the pus is generated, until the ligaments fall off; and then treat that with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	 And if the abscess is due to a dry vein, then you should hold water as close as possible to the abscess with a cord; and then insert the needle where you had your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be a double thread until you extract that from the other side, and then bind the abscess with a good ligature as I have told you in the grape ligature of two parts with two ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	 But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert a horsehair with that needle throughout all of the abscess after the first incision of the needle, and strengthen your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	 Then dry the abscess in its middle part until what is inside it comes out, then you will cut the excess of the cord and let what is tied to it go.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then place on the wound the cloth you have soaked in vinegar and oil, and then administer the treatment which is made with lime and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	 Chapter one of the abscess which occurs due to a twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	 Similarly, an abscess can occur in the artery and in the vein, and likewise an abscess can occur in the nerves when it occurs due to their pulsation or from excessive work, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	 And it is most commonly found in the areas of the auxiliary or ankle joints, or in any place where the joints are more prominent.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	 And it is a serious abscess, and its appearance resembles that of the rest of the body, and when it is close to its end and becomes very tense, the patient feels something like a stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	 And it is not an abscess that grows in the belly of the body, and therefore the colon is left out, and it is prominent at all times and does not go to the front or back parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	 Therefore, for those that are in the joints, it is unnecessary to seal them with iron, because it will quickly lead to contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	 "But if it is in the head or forehead, remove it with a spoon.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	 "But if the swelling is small, then cut that off with scissors and excise it from the root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "And if it is large, then suspend it with hooks, and incise that, and then remove that; and close the wound with stitches, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	 "Chapter II
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	 "On the incision of an abscess that occurs on the cheek and also on the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	 "There are some wounds in the bellies of many men and in other parts of their bodies which are called funguses because they resemble fungi, whose roots are subtle and the head is large; and already their lips have turned black, and it is one of the lesser ones, and it is very significant.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	 "And I have seen one, and in his belly there were two such growths that resembled fungi even more, and there was no difference between them except that they were small.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	 "And the lips of those were turned inside out and split open, and a moisture ran from them constantly.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	 "So I incised those and found in one eighteen ticks, and in the other six ticks.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	 And the operation in their incision is such that you should consider if the patient is moist, and the color of their humors is white, moist, and of a subtle nature; then you cut them with a broad spatula, and in your presence, there are cauteries on fire, for many times you must expel much blood from them; and if the bleeding continues, cauterize that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	 And if you see the patient frightened and fearful, beware of incising with iron; rather, take freshly made lead plaster, and strengthen that humor with it, using the manner we have said; and let it sit for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	 And then adjust in the tightness of the lead thread; thus, do not cease strengthening the large amount of lead in it until it is cut and falls by itself without effort.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	 But if the humor is of a coarse nature, then in its incision there is some cause for fear and dread, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	 But it is possible that you incise most of it, and then cauterize that area to prevent its return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	 And then care for the patient until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	 And be careful not to cut into that which is of dark color, has little feeling, and has irregular edges, for that is also like cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	 And I come to mind with the memory of crab near this.
Capitol .lii.	 Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	 On the care for the prominence of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	 The prominence of the navel is caused by several reasons; either by fissures in the cipher which is on the belly, and from it comes out the tissue or intestines as in other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or artery as previously stated, or by confined gas.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	 But if it is by a fissure in the cipher and by the issuing of the tissue, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the body; and it is without pain, and appears in various places.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	 And if it is by the protrusion of the intestine, then its appearance with that which we have mentioned is of more violent diversity, and when you press on it as we said, it hides, and then returns; and it is very light with it, and it is greatly magnified by much bathing and hard work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	 Based on the pattern and context of the provided translation, here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	 And if it is due to blood, then at that time appear the blackish pustule.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	 But if it is caused by flesh, then the abscess is severe, large and hard, and it feels like a mass of varying size.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	 But if it is due to flatulence, then touching it makes one roar with pain.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	 And the treatment for it is that you should consider whether the swelling of the navel is due to an arrow wound, or a vein issue, or flatulence; if so, you must refrain from treating it, because in such cases there is danger and fear, just as I have taught you in the chapter where I discussed abscesses caused by arrow wounds and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	 And if the swelling of the navel is due to intestine or hernia, then you should command the patient to lie on their side and be fully extended; and then sign with a probe around the entire navel, and then instruct them to turn onto their back between your hands on their belly; and then surround the area of the navel where you probed with lard; and then gently extend the majority of the abscess towards the upper part with a large hook; and then bind it tightly in the area with strong thread or silk, using the proper method for binding. 																														
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	 And if you have found the cloth, then take it with oil; and cut away the excess parts of him.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	 But if it is contrary to your archery or vein, then circle around that spot and return to your operation; and take two needles and put into them two strong threads, and insert two needles in the circle you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, which you should make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess into four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place open until the flesh swells and falls out by itself; or cut that part when it has thinned and fallen, and then treat it with water from the appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	 And if the prominence of the navel is full of flesh or due to moisture, then you should remove the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture found in it, and then treat that place with water that suits and solidifies the area.
Capitol .liii.	 Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	 On the care of the crab.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	 As we have said in the division, about the type of crab and in what way it is treated with medicines, and that a knife should be avoided in its treatment so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have spoken about crabs generated in the womb and the caution of their treatment.  This sentence seems to be discussing the topic of treating genital warts (crabs) using medicinal methods instead of surgical ones, and emphasizing the need for careful treatment to prevent further complications.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	 And the ancients said that in some cases, cancer is located in places where it can be eradicated, such as breast cancer or testicular cancer, and it should be removed along with its resemblances to other members, especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	 But when it is advanced and large, one should not approach it, for I know of no cure for such cases, nor have I seen another or heard of its occurrence.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	 And the operation for it, as we have said, is to precede and let the patient purge with black bile some times, and then bleed him if an evident swelling is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	 Then prepare the patient with a preparation suitable for the operation, and then cauterize in the wound those places that are necessary; and then remove from all sides with good purging until there is no cause left for its return.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	 Allow the blood to flow and do not stop it too quickly; press on the areas and wipe away the thick blood entirely with your hand or with an instrument that you have among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 But if you encounter resistance to the thick blood due to veins or arteries, then cauterize it until the flow of blood ceases, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	 The text appears to be discussing a medical procedure or condition. Here’s a line-by-line translation attempt:
De curacio de ydropici.	 "About the treatment of diabetics.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	 "We have already mentioned, in the division, the types of diabetes due to water and the signs of each type, as well as their treatment with medicine.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	 "And that which is treated with iron is only the type of altitha alone, and it should not be approached with iron for the type of tympanistria or the type of hyporchia, because this is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	 "And when you have treated this type of diabetic tympanistria with medicine and your treatment does not work, then consider that if the patient has already succumbed to weakness or is suffering from another type of diabetes, such as cough or abdominal pain and similar conditions, then be careful not to treat them with iron, for there is concern about this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	 "But if you see the patient is full of strength and has no other illness besides diabetes alone, and is neither a child nor an old person, then the method for treating them is that you lift the patient between your hands, and minister to them by pressing their abdomen with your hand, removing the water from the region below the navel, and then take a thorny spatula of this kind:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	 And next consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, because then you must make an incision below the navel for three fingers' width, to the right of the patient, on the pubic region.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	 But if the generation of dropsy is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers' width.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	 And if the generation is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the left side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	 And it is not necessary that your incision be on the side where the patient wants, so that the excesses do not flow to that place easily.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	 And then perforate with the instrument all along the intestine, and then introduce it into that incision, and raise your hand with the spatula between the intestine and the skin, and you will extract that; and if it is the size of a nail or thereabouts.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	 And then pierce the skin until the spatula reaches the empty place, which is the location of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And then extract that and introduce an instrument like this:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	 and it is similar to a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or tin. At the lowest part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the end of it is sharpened like the tip of a feather, as you see.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	 Certainly! Here’s the translation of the provided sentence:
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	 Here's my best guess at the meaning of this sentence and a line-by-line translation:
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	 And immediately extract the instrument, and retrieve the water that causes it, for as soon as it is held by the chain that pulls it out from the container which is counted to you that you should pierce it in that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	 And immediately repeat the process on another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water each time, and do this for several days in a row, and be careful not to leave any water behind except a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	 But if you fear for the patient and leave behind a large quantity of water, then treat that area with burial in hot sand, and fumigate it in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	 And cauterize the stomach and the spleen near the area of water extraction, as I have previously instructed.
Capitol .lv.	 Chapter .51 (or "fifty-one" if written in words)
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	 Of the treatment of infants whose urinary passages are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	 Sometimes one of the infants comes out of the mother's womb and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or there is a narrow opening or it is not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	 Therefore, it is necessary to pierce with a fine needle as soon as it is born.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	 And then place a thin lead wire in the hole and tie it off, and leave it there for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	 And when he wants to urinate, lift him up so that he can urinate; then put him back down.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	 And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the spot will not close this opening.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	 But if the hole is small, it should be treated with a lead wire as we have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	 But those in which the hole is not in its proper place are called hypospadias, and the reason for this is that the one who is born with it has the end of the penis at the bottom, so he cannot urinate straight ahead; rather, he lifts his penis upwards with his hand. And it is not a generative organ, because the semen cannot reach the mother properly, and it is a very bad condition.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	 And the manner of the operation on him is that the patient be placed on his back, and then you extend the head of his penis with your left hand using strong traction, and incise the head of the penis from the foreskin with a sharp knife, like cutting a quill, or as if you were slicing off some part, so that the middle part comes out resembling the head of the penis and the hole falls in the middle place where it should.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	 And take care that in your operation for blood flow, because it often happens this way; and pause on the patient with something that will stop the bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	 Chapter 56.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	 Of the disease which occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of the corruption and blackening and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	 Many times this disease occurs in the penis, which is a prominent piece of red flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	 And one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	 Not malignant, which means you should suspend it with fine thread and cut it off until it is completely healed; then place on that spot a cotton ball soaked in Egyptian ointment; and after that, treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is cured.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	 And if the disease is malignant, of dark color, then you should apply a pointed cautery near its beginning and its root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	 But if the disease is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the disease is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the part of the disease that is inside at the beginning until it is healed; and then you treat the part that is outside, because when you treat both parts of the foreskin together, it is not certain that it will not spread.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	 And if you see that the genitals and foreskin have turned black and are corrupted, then you must remove everything that has darkened and is beginning to decay or has already decayed; and next, smear this area with honey mixed with finely ground and sifted pomegranate peel.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	 And then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	 But if there is a flow of blood, then apply a lunar cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	 For the cautery is beneficial for two purposes at once, that is, to stop the blood flow and to heal the wound when it has begun to decay.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	 And if the head of the penis is rotten and completely destroyed at that moment, then you must insert a lead tube into the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	 In the case of adhesion between the foreskin and the head of the penis (and this adhesion occurs only in those whose foreskin is healthy, and for whom circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess), you should gently remove it with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	 And if it is difficult to distinguish them precisely, then you should scrape off some of the skin from the head of the penis and the foreskin with a spatula, because the foreskin, being delicate, is easily pierced due to its delicacy.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	 Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a fine thread that has been soaked in cold water to prevent them from sticking together again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	 And then it should be treated with six stitches until it is healed and consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	 Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	 On the cleansing of children and on the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	 Circumcision is not a cure for all diseases like other illnesses; however, since it is our operation and within our control, and especially because it mainly concerns children, it is necessary that we determine the best procedure and most gentle method to preserve health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	 Therefore, I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and the reason is that we have acquired this knowledge through experience. That is why I have found most of the craftsmen and barbers using circumcision and cleansing with a razor and towels; they also use bandages with honey and cauterization with a nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	 And I have already tried all these methods and found no better way of modifying with scissors, with thread and needle for sewing in the manner of a nail, because many times you must cut off the tip more from above, because the foreskin has two layers, and one layer remains below, and it is very easy to be forced into another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	 And in the modification which is done with pincers and is pointed, like those used by cobblers, the incision at the end of the male member is not secure, because it easily enters into its hole.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	 But in the operation with a nail, you often find iron and it corrupts your work.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	 And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and many times there is none in such a way that there is no need for modification, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	 But of the modification which is done with scissors and thread with needle, I have found the best method through experimentation, because the scissors are of proportional incision, so that the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; and thus as you press your hand proportionally on two sharp points, you cut according to a comparison in one time; and it is made a compression with the thread in the shape containing the foreskin of the whole penis from every side, with which no error occurs at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	 And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie down as much as possible if it is one of those who understands a little, do not let him move but place a pillow under his knees only, and leave him like this until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	 Then make the child happy in all possible ways so that he can regain his consciousness.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	 Then have everything prepared and ready between your hands, and do not be hesitant; and hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot, so that the child does not see them or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	 Then insert your hand into the child's groin and blow into the urethra, and pull it in until the head of the penis is visible, and then clean it of any accumulated dirt.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	 Then tie the marked spot with a double cloth, and then tie another knot a little below that, and then take the thumb of your other hand and press firmly on the knot underneath with good strength, and cut between the two knots.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Then gently raise the penis and pull out the head of the penis; then let the blood flow out slowly, as this is better; and place powder on it, and on top of the powder place a cloth soaked in oil from newly slaughtered pigs mixed with rosemary oil; and leave it like that until the next day; and treat it with treatment until it heals. ➤
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	 The shape of the forceps for modification is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	 The nails on the forceps should be blunt at one end and sharp at the other, so that the hammer's handle is not too short, and the length of both should be equal to the length of two handles each.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	 But the mistake in modification is that if you pull the internal chain too strongly or break it off completely, you must insert it again.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	 Therefore, you should extend that of your thumb with your nail in front of the opening and insert it according to the same measure.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	 And if you cannot hold it with your thumbnail, then extract it with a hook and insert it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	 But if three days have passed and the swelling remains under the penis, then let it subside until the swelling has subsided, and gently scrape it off, and insert it as you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	 And be careful with the head of the penis, for that is not appropriate for it.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	 Therefore, treat it with something that solidifies the wound with the powders we have mentioned in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	 And if it has been inserted too much and you follow the above instructions, that will not harm him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	 And care for him with water until he is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	 Chapter 58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	 About the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	 Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by blockage due to a stone, congealed blood clot, pus, or polyp, and similar things as we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	 And if the urine is not dissolved and the retention is due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	 Then place the patient's feet on his shoulders and stretch his stomach as much as possible over his shoulders, and the patient should clench his thighs as tightly as he can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	 Therefore, at that point the neck of the bladder is constricted and the stone is expelled downwards, which relieves the retention of urine.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	 And if the urine is not dissolved with water as we have said, and a powerful cause is made on the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction of him with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: It should be made of silver and have a concave tip like a bird's quill, with a length similar to that of a palm and a half, at the end of which there should be a fine tube.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	 Based on the given context and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, let's attempt to translate the provided sentence:
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	 "And make a cut on the patient over the bladder, and open the bladder and the penis with wet oils, olive oil, and rose water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	 "Then insert the catheter with ease until it reaches the tip of the penis; then bend the penis down toward the navel; then pass the catheter through that opening; then pass it through until it reaches the bladder, and this should cause the patient to urinate freely, and if not done in this order, it is due to the twisting of the urethra.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	 "Then draw out the pus with a small piece of wool, little by little, because the urine will soak the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	 "Then extract the catheter and use it for treatment with urine, and continue to use the catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	 "Chapter 59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	 "On the method of irrigating the bladder with a catheter and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood, or severe burning sensation, and you wish to instill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a catheter, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	 "Until the extremity of the patient is numb, it remains closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	 And in that case there are three openings: two from one side, like this.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	 In the beginning it is a hollow place where something is wrapped up, according to how much of that thing there is, without addition. When some cause draws out those humors, they are drawn out; and when they are expelled, it also draws them out. And if they are expelled a long time, just as a lantern with which one fights at sea by night, it shines.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	 Therefore, when you want to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the extremity of the lantern into the moisture, and draw out with it the water that is wrapped up in the parts above, because the moisture is drawn into the hollow of the lantern.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	 And then insert the extremity of the lantern into the penis as we have mentioned in the chapter on the bladder; and then draw out the moisture with it, because that moisture immediately reaches the bladder and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	 The shape of the subtle crystal with which the bladder is crystallized, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	 And let it be made of silver or lead, with the head resembling a small feather, and then insert it inside the wound.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	 And then take a pig's bladder, and place in it the liquid you want to congeal in the bladder, and then tie it securely between two strong ligatures with double thread, and warm that liquid over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	 And then insert the tip of the crystal into the wound.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	 And then press your hand firmly on the bladder with the liquid until the patient feels that the liquid has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	 But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce it all around its circumference; and then insert strong thread into those holes so that they are tied together; and then add the circle in the same way as you would sew a garment, because you place in it whatever liquid you want among the humors, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	 And then you tie it to the instrument and use it in the same way as you did with the bladder, and press with your hand until the liquid reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	 Chapter 60
De extraccio de peyra.	 Of the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	 We have already said in the division the species of stones and their cure with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of the latter.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	 And we have said the stone on which cutting operation with the hand and incision should be performed.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	 And the stone generated in the bladder specifically is that which is placed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	 And I will now tell you about it with a clear and concise explanation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	 Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder mostly occurs in children; and of its signs is that the urine that comes out of the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and sand appears in it; and the patient scratches his penis, and often shakes it, and then becomes erect; and with this, you will recognize the cause.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	 And it is easier to heal children from this up until they reach fourteen years of age; and it is a difficult cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	 But in young people it is better because they are between these two extremes.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	 And of that [condition] where the stone is larger and the cure is lighter; and if it is small, it is contrary to that [condition].
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	 Therefore, when it comes to the treatment of this condition, at the beginning, it is necessary to cleanse the patient with a clyster that extracts all the fissure that is in his intestines; because this fissure sometimes prevents the expulsion of the stone due to its search.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	 And then take the patient by his feet and raise him up and down so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or moves from its place, or sometimes.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	 And then make that incision between your prepared hands, and let his hands be below his parts, so that the bladder is entirely made sloping downwards.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	 And then find that [stone] and take all of it out.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	 Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then quickly place a section over him [the patient].
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	 And if it does not come out with your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil your index finger of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if he is a grown man, and insert it into his anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	 Here is my attempt at translating the given line:
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	 And slowly turn that small [object] little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	 Then press on it with your finger, and expel it towards the outer parts away from the place where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	 And command the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend the thighs outward with their right hand, and with their other hand to lift the rope that is under the thighs, in the area of the incision.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Then insert a spatula, the shape of which looks like this:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	 And cut through it between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle, but towards the side of the left hip; and let the incision be on that stone and your finger be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the opening outside is wide and inside narrow according to the amount that the stone allows, and no more, because when you press with your finger which is in the anus, the stone will come out without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	 And know that there are some stones with angles and edges, which makes their expulsion difficult.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	 Here's my attempt at translating this line:
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	 "Therefore, if it is that which is sharp and narrow, adjust it into the crevice.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	 "And if it is not thus removed, then you must invent a device to be placed on or around the object, with an end that is as sharp as a file used for carving stone, and which does not slip; or you can insert a fine tool with a curved tip underneath the object.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	 "But if you cannot do so, then widen the opening slightly, and if you see blood flow, cut off that part strongly with powdered vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	 "But if there are more than one stone, then at the beginning press your hand against the opening of the bladder and cut around it; then press a little more on that area; and do the same if there are more than two stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	 "And if the stone is very large, then it is ignorant to cut it with a large incision, because two bad outcomes may happen to the patient: either death or continuous dribbling of urine, because the area is not completely healed.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	 "But administer an expulsive to make it come out, or use forceps in the incision to extract it piece by piece.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	 When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe leaves and dragon's blood, and strengthen it with that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	 And place over that cloth infused in oil and wine, or in warm oil and cold water, so that the abscess may be drawn out gently.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	 And then lay the patient on their side, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	 And when you have removed it, wash the area with water and some oil, and then treat it with diaphanol ointment and diaper ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	 But if in the wound there occurs an abscess that is harsh and corrosive, and it appears as if the blood is frozen in the bladder, causing urination to be blocked (and this is known by the excretion of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains, it will provoke the bladder to corrupt and cause putrefaction in the patient.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And then wash the wound with strong vinegar, water and salt, and apply an opposite remedy suitable for their constitution until they are healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	 And it is necessary in all hours of treatment that you read both the cushions and adjust the medicines that are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if the stone is small and is in the bladder, and it has entered the body, and urination is prohibited, then cure that with water which I recommend before it becomes dry, because many times this treatment has been accused of causing dryness; and I have experienced this, and it is that you take an iron awl, whose form is as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	 with a sharpened tip like a triangle, pointed, placed in a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	 Then take a wire, and tie the bladder with it below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	 Then insert the iron into the bladder, piercing with ease until the awl reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	 And turn the awl with your hand in that stone little by little, and pierce its opening until you make it penetrate on the other side; because the urine is immediately released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	 Then press your hand over what is left of the stone on the outside of the bladder, because that part is sharp and has been forced out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	 And then you cut over the stone in that groove between two sutures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	 And then extract that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	 And then unbind the bandage and cleanse the congealed blood, which is present in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	 And it is not necessary to bandage the stone with fat below the stone, except so that it does not return to the bladder; and the other bandage above, for when the fat is unbound near the edge of the stone, the chain returns to its place and covers the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	 And for this reason it is necessary that when you bandage the fat above, you lift the chain to the upper parts or return your compliment, and cover the wound in such a way as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	 Chapter 61
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	 Of the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	 Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	 But if a stone is seen in one of them, then its cure is difficult and it is forbidden by too many means.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	 One reason is that the woman is very weak.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	 And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who knows how to explain herself to the doctor when she is chaste or among the women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	 The third reason is that you would not find a woman well-versed in this art, especially the operation with hands.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	 The fourth reason is that the place of incision in women over stone [likely referring to a location near the bladder] is far from the place of the stone, so you will need a preceding incision, and there is fear associated with this.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	 However, if necessity compels you to do so, then it is necessary for you to take a midwife who is very skilled, and such a woman is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	 But if you are deprived of that [skilled midwife], then look for a surgeon who is clever and subtle, or present a noblewoman well-versed in the ways of women, or a woman who is knowledgeable in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	 Therefore, present her [the skilled woman], and command her to do everything that you tell her to do, from the investigation of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is to see if the woman is a virgin. If she is, then she should insert her finger into the woman's rectum and feel for the stone. евич Therefore, present her [the skilled woman], and command her to do everything that you tell her to do, from the investigation of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is to see if the woman is a virgin. If she is, then she should insert her finger into the woman's rectum and feel for the stone. ievalid
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	 Therefore, if [the stone] is found, cut off [the woman's] finger, and then command her to make an incision on herself.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	 "But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and press downwards on the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder and compressing it with good force.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	 "So if it is found, then it should be gradually drawn from the bladder opening to the lower parts with all of its strength until it reaches the level of the pelvis.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	 "And then you should cut through that projection at the top of the vagina to reach the level of the pelvis from whatever side it may be, and place the stone in that part, ensuring that the patient's finger remains on the stone until it is extracted.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	 "And at the beginning, make the incision small; then insert the ray into that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the size of the incision according to the amount that you know the stone will pass through it.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	 "And know that there are different types of stones: for they can be few and large, smooth and rough, long and round, and have ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	 "So you should know which type it is by the way you indicate what you want to do with it.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 And if you see blood flow, place powdered vitriol on the spot and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops. Then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	 And prepare with you the instruments mentioned in the removal of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	 And if you see blood flow and know that the bleeding is from an artery that has been cut, then place powder on the spot and press it firmly with bandages and bindings, and do not repeat this; let the stone remain and do not remove it, for the patient will die soon.
E aprop cura la plagua.	 Then care for the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 Therefore, once the bleeding has subsided after several days and the area has healed, then you may return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	 Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	 On sectioning for hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	 A hydrocele is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white bag which is below the spermatic cord containing the testicle, and it is called a scrotum.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	 Certainly! Let's translate the sentence line by line:
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	 "And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the genitals, because it is there that this material is infused, and sometimes it happens due to a blow to the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	 "And this moisture has various colors, because its color can be tending towards yellowish or reddish, or red, or black and feculent, or watery white, and it is the latter that is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	 "And the signs by which this accumulation of water is known are these: because if it is in the white bladder that we have mentioned, then the swelling is round and slightly elongated like the shape of an egg, and it appears in the genital area, because the humidity contains all of that part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	 "And if the humidity is in the proper fatty tissue, then the swelling is round and divided like an egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another type of egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	 "And if the humidity is between the sac of the genitals and the white bladder, then cut [or drain] below the navel.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	 "And if you want to know the color of the humidity, then test the color of the humidity in the swelling with a sharp instrument whose form precedes; and judge what is inside based on what appears on the surface of the instrument.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	 When we come to the care of him with a fever, then it is necessary to order the patient to be bloodletted if this is possible for you, and see to his things closely.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	 Then have him lie on his back on a cause somewhat raised, and place soft cloths under him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	 Then sit down on the left side of him, and command the assistant to sit on his right side, extending their rod to one of two sides at the base of the knees and the beginning of the navel of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	 Then take a lancet and carefully split the base of the knees halfway along its length up to near the pubis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	 And let the section be made equally straight along the line that you should follow along the pubic bone, until it reaches the white chord.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	 And scrape it off, and observe, and be careful not to cut into that; and let your scraping with which you scrape continue until it is suspended by the most delicate and finely examined incision according to the amount possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	 Then pierce the bladder full of water with a wide puncture, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	 And then separate between two lips of the section with scissors, and extend the clamp to the divided parts above; do not touch the cord that holds the testicles, and cut the clamp in such a manner as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	 And cut it completely or in pieces, especially its thin flap, because if you do not examine the cut carefully, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	 But if the water proceeds from outside its cord during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the clamp, return it inside, and then close the two lips of the testicle cord with a suture, and then treat it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	 And if you find the water corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary that you cut the vessels that are above the suspensory ligament, and extract the water, and then treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	 But if the water has gathered in two places at once, then know that there are two hernias; therefore cut that part as you have done with the other; and if it seems to be one operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	 Here's the translation of the given sentence into English:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	 Here's the translation of your sentence:
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	 And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of with an incision and iron; it is that you take a delicate knife-shaped cautery and inscribe with it the cord of the testicles, and it ignites according to what we have recommended until it reveals the white cyst containing the water. And then you take a cautery of this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	 And it is shaped like the Greek letter delta (Δ).
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	 Then you puncture that cyst with it and ignite until all the moisture has been expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	 Then you extract the cyst with tweezers, you remove it with tweezers, and you remove it with a thin ignited cautery; and you inscribe that as much as possible until you have removed everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the surrounding area.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	 And know that this operation is safer and less likely to cause bleeding, and better than an operation with incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	 However, if you encounter an abscess during the time of incision or cauterization, or bleeding, then it is necessary for you to treat whatever obstacle arises accordingly, with the care that is suitable for it as mentioned earlier.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	 Based on the given context and the similarity to Latin-based languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	 This text appears to be discussing some form of medical treatment for a patient with an abscess (apostema). Here's a line-by-line translation:
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	 And make sure it is widely open so that all the water can flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	 And then place a cloth over the area and tie it securely, so that the remaining water can flow out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 And then care for it until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	 But if there is resistance to the egress of water at that time, you should perforate it: and this is done only because the white skin at the orifice of the wound creates resistance and prevents the release of water, then you must insert into the wound a pen-like instrument with which water is extracted from the bladder, the form of which has been previously described; or fit in the opening of the wound a small tube.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	 And know that the water may return, and it should be watched for up to six or seven months; and when it has returned, then it should be perforated in the same manner, because the patient will thus pass his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	 Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	 On the incision of a flesh-bound hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	 Know that in the incision of this hernia, there is great risk of losing it and causing harm in the greater dispositions; therefore, I have seen its dismissal and being saved by that better method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	 And I remember the operation in that case and the signs of inflammation.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	 Therefore, I say that inflammation occurs in the bodies of those whose humors are imbalanced and this happens for several reasons: either due to an acute, bitter superfluity which is poured into the humors, or due to trauma.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	 And the color of the inflammation matches the color of the body part affected, and there is no pain found in it, and it is a severe inflammation.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	 And if the inflammation is hard and stone-like, its color will be dark, and there will be no feeling in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	 And sometimes it is caused by the constriction of the arteries, and by the inflammation of these, so that its memory is already perceived, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	 But what is caused by the inflammation of the arteries is known by the dispersion of the inflammation when it is pressed with these fingers; and it should not be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	 But that which is caused by the inflammation of a vein is not dispersed from it at all, even with compression by these fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	 And it is possible that incision can be made on this type of inflammation and on other flesh; it is that you cut the skin of the humors, and then spread the egg over the parts above, and extract the white from inside, and free the suspensors of the vessels, and tie them off, and then cut the suspensors after you have freed it from all parts of the egg.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	 If the egg is already with those meats hardened, then it is necessary that you remove the egg and insert that (meat).
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	 And if there is an adhesion between some parts of the liver or the gallbladder, then it is necessary that you separate all that adhesion and insert a round probe into that place.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	 But if there is a lump of flesh in the place of the adhesion that comes from behind, then it is necessary that you insert everything that belongs to it, and remove the egg as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Therefore, when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; and afterward care for it with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	 Chapter .lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	 Of the treatment of hernia that occurs in the bladder.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	 The bladder is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a sprout with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult exercise and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	 And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear due to what has been mentioned previously.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	 Nevertheless, it is necessary that we perform an operation on it according to what the ancients have done.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	 And I say that it is necessary to lay the patient on an elevated bed; then unhook the suspenders of the testicles from below; and then take the cord of the genitals with your said fingers with the thumbs that are proven on the penis; and let those other servants do the same as you, and extend those with great extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	 Then cut longitudinally with a sharp scalpel through the right side of the vessels until the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	 Then scrape from all sides as we have said in the removal of arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	 Then place a needle in which there is a double thread, and tie it first at the beginning of the places where life exists, and then tie it again at their ends.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	 Then cut these longitudinally through the middle of the body according to its length, and extract what has accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	 Then treat the wound with the same care as for other wounds in which you wish health to be generated, so that the vessels which are nourishing one of two genitals may fall, because this is not a bad thing.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	 It seems like the text is discussing a medical procedure involving the testicles and blood vessels. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Capitol .lxv.	 It seems like you've provided the chapter number rather than the sentence. Please provide the full sentence or text that you would like me to translate from the medieval medical treatise.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	 Of the care of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	 The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that opens in the navel extended over the belly from some angles of the belly, because the intestines coming out of that opening go into one of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	 And this opening is either of the navel or of its protrusion, and these two types occur for various reasons: by a blow, by a jump, by a shout, by an elevation due to some serious cause, or by resemblance.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	 The sign of this, when it is due to the extension of the navel, is that it occurs little by little over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess inside the belly because the navel presses on the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	 And the sign of it is when it is due to a section of the navel, for at first it causes sudden and intense pain; and it is a diverse abscess appearing under the skin of the testicle, and this is because of the protrusion of the intestine, and its body remains outside the navel.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	 And sometimes the intestine is forgotten with the towel, and this type of hernia is called an incarcerated inguinoscrotal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	 And sometimes it is done with windiness, and sometimes the intestine runs through a slit, and here it gets stuck, which is very dangerous for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	 And in the treatment of this type of illness with iron, there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid injury in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	 And the method of operating on this is to command the patient to return the intestine with his hand into the deep parts of its cavity if he obeys its return, and then place him on his back between your hands, and raise his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	 Then place the cord that is the spermatic cord above it, and cut the spermatic cord completely along its length; then insert two scissors into the lips of the incision as needed to open the incision with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	 And if, according to the quantity that is possible for you, from that the scrotum is forgotten.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	 And then you should remove those parts which are below the cord of the testicles, until you discover the hard white tissue from each side.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	 Then you should insert your finger into the testicle, between the white tissue that is below the cord of the egg and the second white tissue, and dissolve any adhesions that are in the area behind the egg.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	 Then with your right hand, grasp the cord of the testicles on the outer parts, and with this, raise the white tissue with your left hand, and lift the egg with the tissue to the incision site; command the assistant to extend the egg upward, and you dissolve the adhesions behind with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	 And make sure with your fingers that there is no intestine wrapped in the hard white tissue.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	 But if you find any of it, then you should return it to the abdomen below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	 Then take a needle with a thick thread made of six threads, and insert it beneath the end of the tissue that is below the cord of the testicles where the incision was made; then cut the ends of the thread so that they extend four threads long, and then tie some of them together in the shape of a cross; and bind the tissue that we mentioned is below the cord of the testicles with this firmly on two sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	 And then wrap the ends of the thread and bind them securely with a strong ligature, ensuring that none of the vessels can transmit any cause for an abscess to form here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	 And place another ligature a little lower than the first one, about three fingers' width; and then cut off these two ligatures leaving a piece of thread which is as thick as the big toe, and cut away everything else that remains roundly, and take out the testicle.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	 And then cut off the piece below the ligature of the testicle so that blood and pus flow as we have explained in what we said before.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	 And then administer wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and apply the ligature that we have recommended (and sometimes the white thread is cauterized, which we mentioned near the cutting of the testicle to prevent bleeding, because many times this happens) and leave the ligature until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	 But if the scab takes a long time to fall off, then dip it in hot water and place it on the area until it falls off, as we said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 "And then heal the wound with the other treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	 It seems you meant to include a sentence to translate. Please provide the next source sentence, and I'll do my best to translate it into English for you.
De hernia ventosa.	 "On windy hernias.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	 "In this type of hernia, we have not seen anyone who has been cured by using iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	 "And the first say that it is done in this way, as we have recounted for hernias that are with pus; which is that you tie the vessels near the section on that one with ease; and then dry in the middle place around the abscess with water that opens it, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	 "And heal the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	 "Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	 "About the displacement that occurs in the joints.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	 "Sometimes there is a rupture in the joints as we have said, and it protrudes the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	 "And they do not assign any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if they do, that is little; and it returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	 "But if the time is prolonged with that, it is a closed rupture in the bag until the intestine comes out into the bag; and this happens because of the extension of the bag which is in the joints as we have said, which cause is because the bag is stretched, and thus it becomes softened and the place becomes swollen and protrudes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	 And his treatment is with a cautery in the manner that has been described before.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	 And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then you dry the affected area of the broken apostems with a section by the width according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	 And then strengthen the white cloth that is under the bandage until it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	 And then take the reed and place it over the prominent part of the cloth, and press it against the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	 And then sew the two prominent places on the end of the cloth together with stitches.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	 And then remove the end of the reed, and do not insert it completely into the cloth, nor should you extend the opening, or any other similar cause as I will tell you in the treatment of internal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	 And then treat it with the treatment for wounds, and when you have inserted the threads, clean it and restore the wound until it is healed; because the cloth is tight and does not fit the prominence of the break.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	 Cauterization is better in this case, as it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	 It looks like you only provided the heading "Capitol .lxviii." for translation. This appears to be a chapter or section header rather than a full sentence with content that can be translated line by line into English. If you provide a complete sentence from the text, I'd be happy to help translate it!
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	 This is a difficult text due to its archaic language and possible scribal errors or corruptions. Here's a possible interpretation:
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	 Certainly! Let's translate this sentence line by line:
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	 And if you wish, in the beginning cut away the excess of the softened tendon with three or four boiled applications and with firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	 Then carefully cut between the sutures; then treat with care for other ailments until it is healed and the stitches fall out.
Capitol .lxix.	 Chapter 69
De castracio.	 Of Castration
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	 You should know that castration is prohibited in our law, but it has been reported to me that I may remember it in this book; and the memory of it is not necessary except for two reasons: one is so that the physician knows about it when asked about it, and thus knows how to care for the one on whom it has occurred. The other reason is that we have often had need of castrating other animals for our benefit from them, as with sheep, goats, pigs, and similarly with animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	 Therefore, I say that castration is done in two ways: either by tearing or by incision and cutting.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	 But in that which is done by tearing, the way of the operation is that we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles are softened and lengthened and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	 And then take those with your hand inside until they are dissolved and do not appear after the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	 But in castration done by incision and section, it is necessary for you to hold the animal and press the spermatic cord of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	 And then tie the suspensory ligaments, and cut over each testicle with an incision until you have processed both testicles.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	 And then cut those pus which you will have scraped off each one.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	 And do not leave any on those of the scrotum, except for a subtle one which is over the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	 And this manner of castration is better which is done by attrition, because attrition leaves no trace of the testicles, so that the animal does not desire to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 And then care for the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	 Chapter .70
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	 On the care of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	 Hermaphroditism in men is of two kinds: one is when it appears that the space in the spermatic cord, which is between two testicles, has the shape of a woman's vulva with pubic hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	 And sometimes from that part of the body there is urine in the scrotum.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	 But in women it is different: the female vulva is similar to two male testicles, a little smaller, and at the entrance there are two small folds of skin like the male foreskin, and two more folds inside.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	 And there are three types of treatment: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	 And it is necessary that you cut those tightened meats until the pressure of that one disappears, and then treat those with the treatment of the other diseases.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	 And in the second type of men, where there is urine in the scrotum, there is no treatment or operation for him.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	 About a swelling and prominent flesh due to causes related to women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	 A strong swelling is caused by natural reasons until it becomes excessive and must be treated with care; sometimes in some women it grows so much that it spreads like in men and can reach during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	 Therefore, it is necessary that you reduce the swelling with your hand or a needle and cut it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	 And do not end or close, especially in the region of the anus, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	 And then treat it with a remedy for wounds until it heals.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	 But flesh born is flesh that grows within the horror of the mother until it fills that space, and quickly exits from the parts outside according to its likeness (and for this reason some first called it "tailed illness"); therefore, we must close it as we would a membrane, and treat it until it heals. ⇒ But flesh-born is flesh that grows within the mother's horror until it fills that space, and quickly exits from the parts outside according to its likeness (and for this reason some first called it "tailed illness"); therefore, we must close it like a membrane, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .lxxii.	 Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	 About the treatment of hernia.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	 Hernia is when a woman's womb is not perforated, or it has a small hole. ⇒ Hernia is when the womb of a woman is not perforated, or it has a small opening.
E es o natural o accidental.	 And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	 Accidental is due to previous illness, and that is caused either by poorly attached flesh or by subtle or dense adhesions.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	 And it occurs either in the womb of the mother or in her sides, or in the upper part of her or in the lower part of her, and it is forbidden to sew, to undertake, and to give birth, and especially forbidden are menstruations.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	 And the knowledge of that is done by observing the midwife, if the appearance is obvious, then it's a miscarriage; but if not, then you search for it with your words or with the ray.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	 But if the miscarriage is subtle and near both lips, then you cut and disrupt it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	 And place over both lips some powder, and then place your fingers' indicators from both hands together.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	 And the woman should be on her back, her legs spread, and then extend both lips with force until that subtle thread is broken and the miscarriage is exposed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	 And then take some wool and dip it in oil and place it on the spot, and have a man watch over it day and night so that the cut does not heal. 😊
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	 But if the thread is thick and dense, then you should cut it with a scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	 But if the miscarriage is fleshy, then suspend it with a hook, and cut it off. 😊
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	 And with you should be the medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as agrimony, dragon's blood, and yarrow, mixed with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	 And then administer a wide lead pipe so that the wound is not easily healed.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	 And keep it in place for some days and administer something dry to the patient.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	 And then treat it with another healing method until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	 And sometimes this occurs in the major native parts of other fleshes, and then you should proceed according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	 However, if this is due to a cancerous abscess, the cancerous abscess which is in the major part should not be treated in any way with iron.
Capitol .lxxiii.	 Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	 Of the treatment of hemorrhoids and tail, and red boils which occur in the female genitals.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	 Hemorrhoids are considered the openings of many veins, through which blood flows continuously; and when they are old hemorrhoids and made tails.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	 And I have already said in the division the types of these and their signs, and I will say the same about those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	 Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and tails, when they are in the front part of the major [genital area] and do not appear to the touch, then in those there should be no treatment with iron. xspace
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	 Based on the pattern of similarity between Latin, Italian, Spanish and French, let's try to decipher this sentence:
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	 And it is necessary that you place the woman in cold water and approximately extend her with the scissors or with rough cloth, and incise those with the razor.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	 And approximately sprinkle on those the blood flow from one of the cutting powders without bitterness, such as alum and similar to these.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	 And then wrap her feet in cold water for an hour, and then place her in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	 And if the bleeding persists, then give her to fast in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rinds and mallows and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	 And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with water on the back of him.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	 And if the bleeding has stopped, it is good; and if not, apply two cupping glasses to the breasts without scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then take wool and soak it in coriander juice or hawthorn juice or rosemary juice with strong vinegar, and apply it to the area; and then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	 But if you want the one that is of harsh treatment, it is necessary that you cut what appears to you from that, just as I said in this same way.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And take care that it heals well.
Capitol .lxxiv.	 Chapter 74
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	 A puncture of the bladder has occurred in the mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	 Many types of abscesses have occurred in the mother, such as: caruncle, lenticular, ulcerative, abscess with a tail, herpetiformis, fistulae morrhae, gouty abscess, tile abscess and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	 And I have already listed these illnesses and their types, as well as their symptoms and treatments in the previous section.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	 And it is fitting that I speak in this treatise about the boil that appears in the mother when it is one of the curable abscesses, and if you want to know how its operation is performed with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	 Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with swelling and fever, and if it reddens and throbs, then do not cut it with perforation, and treat it with a remedy that promotes maturation until the acute symptoms subside.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	 And then you must make the woman sit on a low stool with two legs; and lean her back so that her feet are positioned lower than her belly, and let her thighs be spread apart, and place her arms below her knees, and bind each one with a wet bandage as needed.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	 And then the midwife should follow from behind and to the right, with the instrument used to open the orifice of the mother, the shape of which will be discussed next.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	 And when you want to administer this instrument, place it with the ray in the entrance of the mother of the woman, and that what enters from the instrument into the mother is no more than the ray of the mother, and lay down the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	 But if the instrument is larger than the entrance of the mother, then you should place cloths over the texture of the entrance of the mother to prevent the entry of any instrument into the entrance of the mother.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	 And it is necessary that you place the handle that runs along the back of the instrument higher up, and that the one administering holds the instrument and turns the handle until the orifice of the mother is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	 And when the growth appears and is touched with the hand and is soft and wet, then you should dry that place with a broad paddle.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	 And when the pus is evacuated, then you should place a compress soaked in rose oil or green oil, which has some styptic properties; and place a bandage over it at the entrance of the mother.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	 And place outside a mother [nurse] and on the pillow clean wool soaked in water in which there are boiled mallows.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 And let it be treated for about two days with an ointment that should be applied until the patient is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	 And sometimes the mother [nurse] and the wound are washed in this way: it is cleaned with water and honey, then with water in which rosemary or long-leafed aristolochia has been boiled, and finally returned to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	 And if the wound is deep in the flesh, then you should be forbidden from treating the patient with iron, and take care of him instead with water as we have said earlier.
Capitol .lxxv.	 Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	 To teach midwives how to treat pregnant women when they are affected by this unnatural condition, as shown in the figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	 It is necessary for the midwife to know at the beginning the figure of a natural childbirth by its signs, and this is that when you see the woman expelling the excrement from below and desiring to smell the air, and over this she is relieved because what is on her is delivered, and she hastens the exit of the fetus, then know that this delivery is according to the natural figure, and it is the birth of the head first, and the second one hanging or suspended by the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	 When you see these signs, then it is necessary to compress the abdomen of the patient so that the baby descends slightly, because when they descend onto their head, give them the secondine, and cleanse them of those excesses with a good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	 But that which is the case in this situation is unnatural and not praiseworthy, because when the baby comes out with its feet first and its body comes out before its head and feet, or one hand before the other, or the head comes out with the hand, or turns easily onto its neck, and resembles the figures of those who are not to be praised.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	 Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and discerning in all these matters, and to guard against error and deceit.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	 And I am showing all the figures of those, and what is happening in them, so that it may be signified by this and have been written about it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	 When the baby comes out headfirst by natural impulse, but that impulse is very strong in the woman and difficult for her, and sometimes her strength has already weakened, then do this: make a potion with fennel seed and moist oils, and have the women hold it under their arms.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	 And then insert the midwife's finger between the small lips of the vulva and separate them with it, or cut through that area with her nail until the liquid inside comes out due to its moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	 And press the woman's belly until the child is expelled.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	 However, if it does not come out, then the woman must be anointed with oil of rosemary and oil of fenugreek mixed together.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	 And then command the woman to be anointed and pressed, making her sneeze with pepper; and hold her mouth and nose for one hour, because the child will be expelled immediately afterwards.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	 And if both hands of the child are delivered first, then it is necessary that you reduce them with great gentleness little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	 But if it does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a stool and lift her feet up, and then strike the stool against the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall because of the striking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	 And if the hands are not turned inside out and the child dies, then cut them off and extract the membrane of the child or tie its body to your hand with cloth and pull it out with even force, because that will cause it to be expelled.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	 From the expulsion of the embryo onto its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	 When the child emerges from its mother's womb onto its feet, then you should quickly push it back in, and then turn the small child around, and then swallow it, and then take one of its feet and gently stretch it out.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	 But as it has come out into the world, then you should order it to be pressed, and make it cough with conditions, because it will be a foundling if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	 And if it is not a foundling with that which we have spoken of, then you should return the child little by little until you place it in accordance with its natural form, because then it will be a foundling with a lighter birth.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	 And if it is forbidden with all that we have spoken of, then take some wax from an altar candle and dissolved gum, and beat everything in the mortar with good force, and then smear the woman's vulva, the lower part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	 And then make her sit in warm water until she reaches the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	 And when you see that the separated parts are softened, then make for him a fumigation of myrtle and apply it to him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	 This is a challenging task because the text combines elements of several Romance languages and uses some archaic terms that are not commonly used today. I'll do my best to provide an accurate translation based on the context you've provided:
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	 "Also observe the effect on his teeth and his hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	 "When the baby emerges in this manner, then you should gradually insert your small hands; and then the woman should be seated on her knees, with her feet hanging down, and those (hands) should be resting on the bed, completing the hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	 "Then press gently on the baby's belly, and then extract what is left under its feet from the thighs until it is ready for the final push.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	 "And if the baby has not yet come out, then take its feet and shake them with vigorous movements, and then press gently on what is above the hip bones until the baby begins to crown.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	 "Then insert your hands and guide the baby out gradually, and command the woman to push until the baby is delivered.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	 "Also observe if the baby is hanging laterally from one of your hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	 "Try to reduce (move) the baby's hand back into its body, but if you cannot do that, then raise the woman and make her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	 "And if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed, and shake her hips with vigorous blows, and then administer remedies which I have recommended made of linseed.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	 When the delivery has arrived, then perform that scissor [procedure] on the vulva, and then study over the reduction of the hand, and equalize the birth according to natural form, and make the woman sneeze, and command her to press against herself until it is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	 When the child is delivered, his belly will be expanded and his face turned towards his mother's back.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	 Let the midwife take hold of the child's hand and then slowly turn him around, and have her do this with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	 And when it is done and he has been wrapped up, then place on his head that which we have mentioned of oil and swaddling cloths.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	 And then command him to suck little by little, and when you have done this, then perform that scissor [procedure] on one nipple and command her to be inclined towards the right breast, and then command her to press against it; and make her sneeze with care.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	 The delivery of the prepared infant is over the side [of the bed].
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	 When the mother is no longer terrified according to this method, consider [this], and then you shall incise the second membrane with your nail until it has been evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	 And if the tumor is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then you should incise it from the belly button, to prevent it from being retained and causing death.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	 And next, push the tumor towards the divided parts until you place it where it is needed, and instruct the woman to squeeze her thighs together, and the tumor will come out easily with a gentle push, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	 Birth of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	 Know that twins are born from many copulations, and sometimes three or four are born, but this is strange and rarely happens; there are five causes of it, which are natural, not supernatural.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And these are the causes, whether they are multiplied, a second birth, and they are separated by some space, distinguishing those joined at the ligament in each of their umbilicus. Sometimes they are expelled as if it were one fetus by natural light pushing, and sometimes they come out by an unnatural push as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	 And if some are difficult to deliver and you reach the point we mentioned about unnatural figures, then care for them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	 And if the midwife is skilled and does this with ease and finesse, slowly and deliberately, and has been trained according to every possible configuration for which she has been prepared by her training for the purpose of healing.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	 And it is remembered that what forms in the womb from embryos and is aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	 Sometimes a womb can form one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, even ten embryos, and it has already been verified that one woman aborted six and another ten, all fully formed, the cause of which was determined by the glorious wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	 And all this should be known by the midwife, for she must be well-versed in this similar task, and therefore she should approach it as needed.
Capitol .lxxvi.	 Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	 Of extracting the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	 When you treat the dead fetus as described in the division of treatment and it has not yet exited, and you are forced to use manual operation, then you must consider whether the woman is healthy and not suffering from any of the conditions that may cause her loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	 Then it is necessary for the woman to be placed on her back with her head inclined downwards and her knees raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	 And let the assistant hold one of the two parts or tie it with a bandage to prevent the body from stretching before the procedure is complete.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	 And then you should moisten the mother's mouth with oils, honey, and a mixture of althea, fenugreek, and flaxseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	 And then anoint the midwife's hand with those oils and mixtures, and then gently insert her hand into the mother, and then search for the correct location where to place the nails during the procedure.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	 In these places: therefore, consider whether the fetus is ready to descend onto its head, and then place your nails in the following locations on it: the heels, the neck, the mouth, the palate, under the chin, or between the ribs, or under the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	 But if it descends by the feet, then place your nails in the heel or between the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	 And it is necessary to hold the nails with the right hand and place their curve in the location between the fingers of the left hand, then gently insert your hand and place the nails in one of those locations that we have mentioned, until you reach the desired result.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	 This sentence appears to be describing a medical procedure involving positioning and supporting the patient. Here's a possible translation:
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	 "Moreover, it should be well-seated on all sides, so that its extraction is made easier in the same way as it is done with a tooth for its removal.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	 "It is also necessary that the extension be softened between them; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and gently insert them, turning and loosening what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	 "Therefore, if the part of the child is forgotten (still inside), then the nails should be cut closer to where it is most open; and do this until the entire child is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	 "However, if the hand has come out before the other and it is not possible to reduce it due to its stiffness, then a cloth should be wrapped around that hand; and then draw it out until all of it is delivered, and incise it either at the wrist or in the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	 "And you should do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 "But if the head of the child is large, or it becomes stiff during delivery, or there is water in the head, then you should insert between the fingers a spatula with sharp edges and cut the head, extracting the water, or you can use an instrument called 'alundat' to suction out the fluid.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	 And similarly proceed if the tumor is large by nature: then it is necessary to incise that with an almagrete or to take that with an alunda, as we have said; and afterwards extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	 And if the head is swollen and constricted, you should split the collarbone until the moisture that is in the feet has drained out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	 But if it is not complicated and does not respond to swelling, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to your ability.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	 And if the sides of the abdomen are inflamed or have dropsy, then it is necessary that you perforate them until the moisture in them flows out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	 But if the tumor is on its feet, then its attraction is gentle and its direction towards the mother's mouth is gentle.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	 But if the abdomen and feet are constricted, then it is necessary that you extract that with a cloth which you will have wrapped over your hand, and that you split the abdomen and feet until the water in them flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	 But if the other members are present and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's vagina is open, then she should insert her hand into the birth canal, and search for the head with that, and draw it towards the mentioned parts until it reaches the mother's vagina, and then insert one or two fingers into it, and draw it out with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	 And if the mother's mouth is constricted by an aposteme that occurs in her, then it is necessary to not puncture her; instead, it is necessary to administer an infusion of moist, fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	 And apply plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	 And if the abscess is on the same side as the patient's affected area, then if possible, it should be lanced; and an infusion of moist, fatty substances, as mentioned for a live abscess, should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	 And if that is not possible, then it should be incised in sections and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	 And it is necessary to leave no cause remaining inside the wound.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	 And when you have completed all your operations, then administer the infusion that we have mentioned for treating abscesses that occur in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	 And if there is a flow of blood, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	 And I have already seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and above that, another live fetus was attached, and the other fetus is also dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	 It seems like the text is describing a case of an abscess in the navel area that has been present for some time and has now become infected and started to release pus. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	 And I was called to care for him and treated him for a long time, but the wound has not healed.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	 So I placed on him some plasters of strong attraction, and extracted from him a bone, and after a few days, another bone; and I was very surprised, since there are no bones in the stomach.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	 So then I thought that they were bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	 Therefore I investigated the wound and extracted from it many bones, the woman being in her ninth month of pregnancy; and she had lived that way for a long time, until a small arm came out of her.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	 And I did not consider this strange, but rather that in this there is science and aid to those who practice the medical art with their hands for healing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	 Of the shapes of the instruments necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	 The shape of the hook with which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	 This is the shape of the strengthener in which the leaves are cut, and at this cutting there should be two hooks on each end of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	 However, this hook must be finer and more precise, and it should be made either from ivory or boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	 Let's break down the text line by line:
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	 And these two additions should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that she can open with them when you turn the two prescribed fingers.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	 Another similar form, but more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	 It should be made of ebony or boxwood according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	 However, at the end of it there should be two such additions, and the length of each addition should be about one palm, and the width of each should be two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	 And when you want to open the mother with these, then make the woman lie down on her back with her feet hanging over the edge, and open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	 And then open your hand with the instrument in the same way as you do with forceps, according to the amount of opening you want for the mouth of the mother until the midwife does what she wants.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	 The form of vertigo which the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	 The form of pushing with which the child is pushed out.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	 The form of support with which the large head is contained.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	 And it resembles forceps with teeth at the end, as seen, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as seen, with teeth like saw teeth, with which it is cut and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	 Form of treatment:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	  Method for treating those with a spine (spinal condition):
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	  Method for treating those with two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	  Method of using forceps whose teeth are made of saws, and with which the baby's head is cut off:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	  Method of using a spatula with two ends for cutting off the head.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	  Method of using two flat spatulas.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	  All these instruments being exercised, and the more varied their types and prepared by craftsmen, the lighter the operation will be and the more beneficial for the people due to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	 And you should always have these instruments prepared, wherever you are, because their necessity cannot be avoided.
De extraccio de la segondina.	  On the removal of the placenta.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	  When the placenta is retained during childbirth, then you should instruct the patient to hold her breath, and have her sneeze with condition [i.e., on command], and place your hand over her mouth and nose. If by doing this it comes out, that's good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	 And if not, then you take a piece of cloth and make a hole in it, and place in that [hole] burning herbs such as calament, rue, anise, chamomile, dried grapes, cinnamon, and St. John's wort.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	 "All these herbs or some of them should be soaked in water and placed over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	 "Then place a reed tube in the mother's mouth and hold it there until the steam reaches the cavity of her womb.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	 "Then make her sneeze as we have said, and the retained fetus will be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	 "But if this treatment persists and the fetus does not come out, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or a mixture of althea, then insert it into the vagina and seek the fetus with it. When you have found it, take hold of it and draw it out little by little. But if it is attached to the womb of the mother, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you find the fetus, extract it bit by bit straight up so that the mother does not experience a violent attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	 "First, it is necessary for the right and left ribs to be moved easily.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	 "And then adjust the amount of attraction, for she will obey and leave her attachment.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	 And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with an enema and with a potion of oil made from herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	 However, if all the causes we have recommended are not considered, then be careful not to make it worse by repeating the process of removal. Instead, ensure that whatever comes out of her is placed at the mouth of the mother, and then promptly treat it with ointment and tetrapharmacon; for this will cause it to putrefy in a few days and then dissolve and be expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	 But when it putrefies, it becomes a very bad substance for the head and the stomach, which harms the patient; therefore, at that point, it is necessary to administer sublimation fumes and appropriate remedies for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	 But some of the ancients have already tried sublimation fumes made from narcissus and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	 The method of the instrument with which the woman is sublimated to remove menstrual blood and the afterbirth:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	 It should be made of glass or iron.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	 And the subtle end is placed in the vessel, and the wide end over the fire, and the sublimation is placed on the coals of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	 And keep that one inside until the smoke has dissipated and then bring in another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	 Of the treatment for a child's unruptured anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 When newborn infants are born with their anuses not yet pierced, which is a delicate and dangerous situation.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	 Then the midwife should come and pierce it with her fingernail; if not, pierce it with a sharp probe, taking care not to touch the sphincter.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	 And immediately place on it wool soaked in wine and oil; and then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	 But if you fear that it is blocked, then place a tube in the opening for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	 And if obstruction of the anus occurs due to the solidification of a wound or abscess; then that solidification must be cut open, and it should be treated with water as we have said in the treatment for lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	 Of the treatment for fistulas that occur under the anus.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	 The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the anus are called abscesses and swellings, which happen near the outside of the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	 And it is either an ulcer or boils.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	 And when that swelling is old and runs with white, watery moisture or fine pus, and sometimes from these ulcers some penetrating ones occur.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	 And those penetrating ones are known by this: it exits from them with discharge and flatulence; and sometimes the patient suffers from discharge, and very often worms exit from them.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	 And some of those ulcers, at times in the space, penetrate into the bladder, and into the meat of the penis; and some of those penetrating ones enter the joint of the thigh, and into the bone of the femur.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	 And how a penetrating ulcer into the anus and non-penetrating is known: you place your finger in the anus, and carefully insert a thin probe of iron or bronze into the ulcer when there is no obstruction.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	 But if there is an obstruction in it, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	 And if you do not feel it at all and there is no reason for discharge or worms or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and therefore turn to the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	 And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the passage of the penis, then its meaning is the discharge of urine from that [fistula] and prevention [of urine] from this, so that the place be healed with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	 But if it penetrates into the joint of the hip or into the bone and there is pain in the area, then its sign is that the tent [or probe] goes through here if it is not blocked by the bone; and there is pain in the surrounding area of the exit point; and that from it always comes pus; and that medicine has no effect on it, nor does it heal with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	 And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is not a cure for all, and the cure of these is labor and futility of the foolish doctors on whom they depend.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	 But in those that do not penetrate and are not ancient, healing with iron is expected, as I will tell you, and this which I have already tested.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	 And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back and raises his legs between yours, the thighs should be inclined towards his belly, and then insert a lead or iron probe if there is an obstruction in the fistula, until you know the place where the probe passes through.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	 And if that makes the patient feel pain around the neck, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger into the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if you feel in your finger the tent already by itself descuberta penetrar, or if you feel between your finger and that syphac or flesh, then know for certain that that is penetrating; and then do not work on it, because there is no healing there, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	 However, some may say that in some men it heals late.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	 And of the medication by which help is expected for him, it is that you should prepare a subtle fire cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and then repeat this two or three times until all the flesh of the fistula adheres together like the quill of a bird feather.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	 And then bandage it with clean cloths soaked in vinegar until all the adhered flesh is healed, and then treat it with medicines that promote tissue growth and healing. If it heals, good; if not, then it will not heal at any time by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	 This text appears to be describing a surgical procedure for treating a fistula, which is an abnormal connection between two organs or tissue that shouldn't be connected. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	 And then carefully clean those fistulated flesh areas that resemble the quills of a porcupine, ensuring none are left behind.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	 And if there is bleeding that occurs between you and your operation when inserting those flesh areas, then it is advisable to use an instrument of cautery with fire or sharp medicine, because cauterization with fire has two good habits: it tightens the tissues, and it stops the blood and dries out the humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	 And then dress the wound with clean bandages or white cloth until the location receives a cast, and then heal the wound with ointments that promote hardening and healing of the flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	 And so the medications that have astringent and drying properties, when used to restore [the wound], it is considered healed and there is no fear of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	 But if the fistula already extends into the depth of the anus and is elongated on the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it with that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	 And so if you find the opening and there is a layer of cicatrix or flesh between it and the surface, and it is close to the penetration, then do not operate on it directly but rather through a process of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	 Certainly! Here is a line-by-line translation of the given text into English:
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	 And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it runs from the buttocks around the surface of the body with the string to the edge of the anus, then take a perforated-end probe, which is like a needle used for preparing the hearts in this way.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	 And then insert that thread, wrapped with five threads or around those; and then insert the probe with thread into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	 But if it penetrates into the edge of the anus directly, then you extract the thread from that hole as if you insert your finger into the anus; and extract the end of the thread and adjust the two ends together, and tighten each one, and leave it this way for a day or two. And when you notice that the thread is penetrating deeper into the flesh, then tighten well so that those pieces of flesh between the two ends of the thread are cut and fall off.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	 Then care for the wound until it is healed and cured.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	 But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate by whatever method you have prepared, except that it should be very deep, because it is not your job to do this so that you do not cut the tendon; and then do this until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	 Based on the pattern provided, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	 Based on the context and similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	 Hemorrhoids are of two types, either resembling coal within the anus or those which are like raisins.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	 And these can be small or large, and the blood flows from them constantly and is dark, and they protrude outside the anus, located at its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	 However, those that protrude from the anus are of little moisture, from which flows citron water or a small amount of blood with a continuous flow, and they are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	 And the treatment for those inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit down and express until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	 Then cut them off and suspend them with a hook that you have on your finger, and then cauterize the base of these.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	 But if hooks cannot be used due to the moisture and softness of these, then take them with a rough cloth or towel or woolen thread, and extract them with your said fingers, and then cauterize them and sprinkle some warm powders on them near the cautery site, so that they act as a cautery; or cauterize them as previously stated in the chapter on cautery.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 And then care for him with other treatments until he is healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	 And if the feces do not come out, then irritate the patient with an irritant containing a small amount of biting powder, and wash him with the water that is in the colon so that he may evacuate easily when the patient is pressed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	 But if the hemorrhoids are protruding from the anus, then the cause of this is simple. You should take them with your finger or with tweezers and push them back in. Then care for them with the water we mentioned until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	 And he who has performed the incision should administer a suture of them in this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and insert it into the hemorrhoids at the divided parts above. Make the needle penetrate to the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the part below the needle, transversely; and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong tension, then knot the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	 Do this for all [hemorrhoids], and leave one of them unstitched, so that the excess blood can flow from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	 And then place on the affected area a cloth soaked in rose oil or in wax; and place it on the sore and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And then let that remain until it softens; and when it is softened, treat it with ointments or another cure until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	 Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 Many ulcers occur due to excessive dryness or natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 And since they are old and do not respond to that treatment, then you should scrape them with the point of a spatula or your nail until they are moist and remove the scab of pus on top, which hinders healing; and then treat them until they heal.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 And then you remove them with a sharp, violent pustule, the first time they grow and are scabbed over; and then treat them until they heal.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	 The treatment of almesamir is key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	 Know that almesamir is indeed key and is not so unless it is a red, round rash similar in color to the body, occurring throughout the body but especially in the areas below the feet and elbows, and this pain indicates that you should treat them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	 And then it is necessary to cut off what is around the nail, and it should be held with forceps or pliers, and it should be removed from its root; and then heal that part.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	 And if you wish, cauterize the following part as mentioned in the previous chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	 But a wart is a small, rough, round growth on the surface of the body, and many are seen in children's hands.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	 And its treatment is to stretch and cut it out, or to tighten it with a string or hair so that it falls off.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	 And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, either with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	 And already they are removed, both reversed and not reversed, with the instrument that I will describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	 But a mole is a small, soft or rough growth on the surface of the body, mostly on the face, and when cold attacks it, it seems to be bitten by an ant, and it spreads around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	 And its treatment is to take a reed pen of an owl or a vulture feather, and it should be strong, and place it on the mole so that the circle of the pen encloses all parts of it; then turn your hand with the pen until you cut off what is around the mole, and press it into the flesh of the face, and remove the mole from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	 And if you wish, do this with a needle made of iron or steel in the following manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	 And let the top part of the needle be slightly thicker, blunt (meaning it does not pierce), wrapped so that the touch of it is softened and its rotation is controlled.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	 And if you wish to cauterize, do so according to what has been said earlier in the chapter on cautery for anthrax.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	 Regarding the instruments used to provide treatment.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	 Sometimes treatment is done with silver or tin, cast iron or wrought iron; and sometimes these instruments are made small or large according to those for which they are intended. For the treatment of young children, the instrument should be small; and for those whose buttocks are painful or sore, their treatment instruments should also be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	 The shape of the large and few treatment tools:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	 The top of the needle to which the bag is attached should be wide in this manner; and there should be a distinction at the point where the bag is tied, as shown in the image.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	 And the end of it, which is inserted into the rectum, should be blunt (meaning not open) and very thin, tapering to a point; and on one side of its length there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should correspond to the thickness of the rays and a little wider.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	 And let there be a bag in which the medications of animal bladder or sheep wool are placed, and its size should be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	 And let it be punctured by sharp needles as it is rolled up, and if the space between the needles is as thick as a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	 And then insert strong raw fat into those needles, which should be of the same kind or surround them; and use that to seal the bag; and when the bag is placed in it, tightly close its end between two distinguishing points with a very tight knot, and then cauterize each needle with it. But the method of cauterizing is that you fill the bag with the medication, which should be heated according to the patient's tolerance level; and ensure that it is not too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	 Then have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs upwards, and place a cushion underneath them, on which there are usually men or a pillow; and then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; and then gently insert it into the rectum, and then have the assistant take the bag and squeeze it with both hands and press it vigorously until all that is in the bag is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the bag and let the patient raise their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	 Here's my attempt at translating the text:
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	 It looks like the original text is in a language that shares many similarities with Latin and medieval Romance languages like Old Spanish or Occitan. Let's break down the sentence into smaller parts and translate them step by step:
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	 "And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or painful swellings, then use a very fine and thin needle, like those used to pierce infants' ears.
De curacio de las plaguas.	 "Of the treatment of plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	 "I have already mentioned in the division of the treatment of plagues what is suitable for the book, and I say here that the cure should be done with hands and medicines according to the patient's condition.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	 "Therefore, I say that plagues are differentiated according to what causes the plague and where it occurs.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	 "And the causes for which many times plagues are made are such as a blow from a stone, or a cut with a sword or knife, or a strike with a spear, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to these many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	 "But the plagues that are in certain parts of the body are such as a wound that strikes the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the chest, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	 "And I will recount the treatment for certain wounds, and you should apply that reasoning and rule to other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	 And I will begin with the simple diseases of the head, because the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	 Therefore, I say that when a simple injury occurs to the head and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to the impact of a stone or similar object, and if the vein has been cut only slightly but it is a large wound and you fear a carbuncle forming on that patient, then take precaution and quickly perform bloodletting on the cephalic vein without delay; and extract from that person as much blood as necessary according to their strength, unless there is some other reason against bloodletting, especially if the amount of blood coming out of the wound is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	 And let the bloodletting be done on the opposite side of the injured area; and ensure that the patient is protected from drafts, and avoid heavy foods and meats.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	 But if any cause prevents bloodletting, then the patient should be restricted in food and should not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	 And place on the wound, if an abscess forms there, cotton soaked in rose oil or in wine that has been mixed with astringent herbs.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	 But if you are sure that an abscess will form, then place on the wound, if it is fresh with its own blood and air has not changed it, the powder which I will mention soon in detail.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	 And if the air has already changed that [condition], then place some ointment on it until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	 But if the wound is large or caused by a sword and has a similar appearance, and its lips are not closely approximated, then close them with stitches according to how I will recommend for the stitching technique.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	 But if the wound is exposed to the bone and marrow, and there is no retention but only a small fragment, then incise that [area] and promptly treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place as best you can. And instruct the patient to be fed with foods that are nourishing: heads and legs of poultry and similar things, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	 And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise all that is rotten and remove it, and then treat it promptly.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	 But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur, and it has not been divided by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find that it is not cut, then you should incise it with a spatula, or ligate it; and if what we have said does not work for you, then cauterize until the bleeding stops.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	 And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; therefore, you should sprinkle this powder over them so that it hardens before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	 And the manner of making this powder is as follows: take one part of oil from the pine tree, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of fresh lime; let everything be finely ground and sieved, and fill the wound with it, and bind it well until it adheres to it and coagulates with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	 Then bind it above with bandages and leave it, and do not unbind it until it is healed, for the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	 And sometimes this alone is enough when there is no pine tree or dragon's blood available to you.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	 And perform this same operation on large wounds when it is necessary to cover them and bind them tightly, and these are recent wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 And if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then this powder is not intended for such wounds. Rather, treat them with the water we have mentioned earlier, so that you place digestive ointments on them, or place a paste of wheat flour mixed with water and honey on them until they form a scab; and then treat them with the other remedy until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	 "However, if you encounter a small bone fracture with the wound, then extract it using forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	 "And I will describe the treatment for skull fractures when they occur.
De las plaguas del col.	 "About wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	 "However, if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment from a simple head wound.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	 "However, if the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is nerves, there is nothing to do except to avoid treating them with something that causes strong astringency, such as alum and vitriol, because they harm the nerves and cause contraction.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	 "And do not place anything on the wound to stop the bleeding, because the substance of the nerves is blood and its continuation is with the brain, which is the most important of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	 "And if it is treated with light medications, such as being washed with rose water, sometimes infused in rose oil or plain oil, and then wiped when washed with rose water and the other powders according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	 Here is a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	 Here's my translation of the given sentence:
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	 "But if the wound already has a cut artery and there is blood flow, then separate or dry it, tie it off, or cauterize it if necessary to stop the bleeding.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	 "But if the spinal cord or all of it has already been cut and the veins of the neck have been saved, then you should suture the lips of the sheath onto the cane of the penis and do not touch that; first make it equal and return it to its natural shape, and then strengthen it with a decent bandage, and leave it for some days; then treat it with ointments containing astringents and stimulants until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	 "But if the wound has already affected the bone, then you should probe it. And if there are bone fragments in it, remove all that you can; and what you cannot extract, leave it until the wound festers, and is separated, and the flesh around it is relieved.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	 "And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	 "But if in the wound there is a fistula, then treat it with water that will be mentioned later in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	 Based on the given context and similarity to Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the sentence:
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	 If the wound is caused by a spear or sword and you see the depth of it, then consider more if there is gas coming out with the patient's breath; then you will know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	 And if the wound is not deep and it is recent with its own blood, then in the first hour place powder on it, and do not draw out that [blood] so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the body and returns to the heart and weakens the patient. Instead, place an attractive ointment on it, and wash it off two times a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	 And if the ointment is not present, then place a piece of old cloth in the opening of the wound so that it draws out the moisture from the humors; and make sure the patient sleeps on the wound so that the fluid within them flows.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	 But if three days or more have passed since the wound and no spasms, tremors of the heart, or difficulty in breathing occur to the patient, and you see the other good dispositions of him, then know that the wound is safe; and from then on treat it with compresses and with the other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	 If the healing of the patient is delayed and always open, then know that a fistula has formed; treat it accordingly with its specific remedy.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	 And if the wound is from a cut by a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with water that has been used for washing before stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	 But if the injury has already reached the bone, and if there are pieces of bone torn off, then you should turn the wound to try to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	 But if they are not separated, then let the bone fragments remain until the wound heals, as their removal will be easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	 And for other wounds that occur in other parts of the body, the treatment is the same as we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	 About the wounds of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	 The condition that occurs in the belly is either great, small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	 In the case of a great wound, sometimes the intestine or nerves of the intestine are visible because they have protruded, and their stitching is more urgent and delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	 And a small rupture is difficult to repair by any other method, and I know that their reduction is even more difficult if you do not take care of their introduction into their proper place immediately, because it opens and swells, making the operation difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	 And therefore, a large rupture is better, because in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two previously mentioned types.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	 And know that suturing the abdomen is done in four ways, but two sutures are common and suitable for suturing other diseases of the body as well.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	 And two other sutures are specific to other diseases, but nevertheless are most specific to the suturing of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	 And I will explain each one to you with an explanation and clarification.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	 Therefore, I say that when the disease is small and there is any cause of intestinal obstruction through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this happens in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflated due to the cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	 And so when it is like this, then you should scrape that area so that you can submerge a sponge or cloth in tepid water alone, or take it in water with squinant, and cyperum, and spice, and embroques, until the swelling has been resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	 And in some cases this works well, where there is astringency, and it is better for the water alone in the resolution of the swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	 And so when you see the swelling has been resolved, then you moisturize the area with water in which there is a lot of marjoram and mallow, because by this it is alleviated within him without much effort.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	 But if the swelling within him cannot be alleviated by this treatment, then cut a small incision with an instrument used to incise hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	 And the first treatment is better when it is suitable that there is no cutting, and there is no need to dry out and weaken.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	 About the instrument, see its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	 One part of it is sharp and curved, the other part is not sharp, and its tip is thin but not as thin as a spoon, rather it should be blunt to some extent.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	 And so when the wound is expanded and the intestine comes out, it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible, because that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	 But when the disruption is large and in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place the head and feet of the patient higher than the lower parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	 Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always place your intention and consideration on this, so that the part where the wound is located is higher than the other part.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	 And in this way, you should administer it for both large wounds and medium-sized wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	 And for small wounds, place that which is prepared in this way: make sure the administrator is between your feet, holding the entire disruption with their hand and aligning its edges; then reveal to him any other stitching reason.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	 This text appears to be discussing a common method of suturing. Let's break it down line by line:
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	 This text appears to be describing a medical procedure involving needles and thread. Here is a line-by-line translation:
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	 And let the needles be moderate between coarseness and fineness, for fine needles cut the flesh very lightly; and coarse ones are difficult to enter the vein, so it is necessary that they be moderate in fineness and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	 And it is not necessary that the needle be placed at both ends of the vein, lest the flesh be lightly cut and the wound break before its healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	 And do not prolong stitches, so that the wound is not hindered from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	 Then cut the tips of the needles so that they do not injure the patient while sleeping; and you shall place upon the stitches powdered flakes from all sides, which hold the tips of the needles; and leave those in until you know that the wound is already healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	 And these methods of stitching with needles are more suitable for small wounds, because in the stitching of one or two needles, or around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	 But the second method of stitching is common: and that is when you use stitches to gather together the four ends, of the vein and two ends of the needle holder, all at once, with a needle on which thread has been wound, moderate in fineness and coarseness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	 Sure, let's translate this line by line:
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given line:
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	 And they know this stitch (or suture).
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	 And with such a stitch I sutured the wound which had occurred on a man's belly, which had been wounded with a knife, and the opening of the wound was greater than one palm, and there had issued from the intestines around two palms of the middle part of the intestine, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I returned that after the intestine had been out of the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	 And the wound was healed in the space of fifteen days or thereabouts, and I cured him and he is healthy; and then he lived for many years, and he was in his right mind.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	 And the other physicians had judged that he would not be healed; and it happened by miracle, because I did not cure him with ointment, for it was in a place where no ointment or any medicine was found, but I placed on the wound clean cloths two times a day and frequent washing with honey water until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	 But I will describe two types of stitches according to the account of Paulus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	 And this is how you begin with the stitch of the cord: and you insert the needle from outside to inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	 This text appears to describe a medical procedure involving needles and meridians or channels in the body, similar to some practices in traditional Chinese medicine. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	 Here's my attempt at translating the provided sentence:
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	 "And make it penetrate with that, your penetration with which you make it penetrate into the bladder at its opening, so that all of it can enter.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	 "And then begin from this side of the bladder, and with that, puncture through to the other side of the bladder, and remove the needle from the tube that has penetrated it, and then return that tube back into that opening on the other side of the bladder with this end of the catheter; and then remove that tube which is inside him.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	 "And do this one time and another, and do it one time after another until you have removed everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	 "And the end of this method of stitching is that you sew with skin stitches with which you sew the skin, so that you sew the bladder once from the opening of the tube, and let the other opening be until it is healed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	 "But the second type of proper stitching, which they call equally 'Walian', and this is said about it and recommended for it, is that you sew that semi-circularly with which certain physicians sew it, so that they add all the openings to their appropriate places by nature; and apply the end of one opening to the other end of the opening, and this is done as I have told you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	 Sure, I'll give it my best shot at translating the given text:
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	 And then you should turn those things around, and make each one penetrate from the inside out to two extreme points on either side of the opposite limb.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	 And this method of suturing is better than common light suturing, and it is the suture that was previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	 This is the word of Gaul
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	 And others may say that ventral suture is done with two needles, so you insert a thread into each one, and begin by introducing the needle from whichever side you prefer, and make it penetrate to the other side following the suturing technique used for those who have their hearts pierced equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	 And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, then its suture is more difficult than for other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	 However, the judgment of wound treatment is the same as for other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	 Which is caused because when you find the fresh wound with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the intestine and sew it up decently, then place upon it a carnifying powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 And if the air has already altered the wound, then place over it a salve that is in your presence until it forms hard calluses and the threads are consolidated; and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	 But if you do not have the necessary medicines at hand, then place over it immediately, as soon as it starts to ooze pus, vinegar and water mixed together in equal parts, changing this dressing twice a day until it is healed, because for simple wounds, no other medicine is needed.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	 But if you fear that the wound may spread to the main limbs, then it is necessary for you to soak a piece of wool in good quality olive oil or rosemary oil and place it around the area between the joints and below the armpits.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	 And if pain or putrefaction occurs in their intestines, because after a few hours it becomes necessary, then cauterize that area with black ebony stiptic, especially if the putrefaction has penetrated into the cavity of the intestine.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	 And know that which is of the large intestine is of easier healing than that which is in the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	 And it is difficult to heal because the intestine which is called "jejunum" does not receive healing from any wound that befalls it; and this is due to the great number of veins in it, and their magnitude within it, and the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	 But if what proceeds from the wound is the intestine, and you manage to find it fresh, reduce it according to your skill with which you also reduce the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	 But if it has passed into the abdominal cavity and has already turned yellow or black, then you should strengthen that with a thread over the affected area so that blood flow will come out, for in the intestine there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	 And then you should insert that which is another ligament, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from the exit of the wound so that upon you there may be relief from the attraction of it for the return of the intestine and the discharge of the arm of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	 "Remembrance of the plagues that happen in the intestines.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	 "When a disruption occurs in the intestines and it is small, then it is possible for it to be restored in some men, as I have seen that one who was wounded in his stomach with a lance thrust and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had formed an ulcer, and thus he felt pain and bloating.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	 "Then I pursued the treatment of him already since he was not fully cured, but rather followed a subtle approach to ensure that it would heal and the area would be consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	 "And I, seeing that the area was already consolidated, told the patient to expect an unfortunate event in his stomach; and no one expected this unfortunate event, but rather he remained in good health, eating and drinking well, and then entered a bath and performed his tasks.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	 "And some experienced people say that when there is a wound in the intestines and it is small, then it should be tied in this manner: you take ants with large heads; and then you adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those ants whose mouth is open over the two lips of the wound. Then, when it takes hold of them and closes its mouth, cut off its head, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	 "And then place another ant near the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants, placing one after the other according to the size of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	 "And then return the intestine and close the wound, leaving those attached parts inside until the intestine is healed; do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	 "And if possible, bind the intestine with fine thread made from the intestines of an animal attached to it, as it is more like a needle; and you should take the end of these intestinal threads, make it very thin, and then bind the end of it with thread around it, insert that thread through needles, and sew up the intestine with it, returning it into its place.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	 "And this method of sewing with ants is only a way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	 "However, if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, for then it is only a thinning and not a complete healing.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	 "Of the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	 "Know that every wound and abscess when it becomes rotten and old, and turns into an ulcer, and is not healed or closed at all times, then in any part of the body it is generally called a fistula, and we call this 'zukhem'.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	 And fistula according to the truth is a hardened and fibrous nodule, white in color, which does not cause pain, and it has a cavity like the cavity of bird feather; and for this reason, that is called alkus rizatz, that is, feather.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	 Sure, here's a translation of the given text:
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	 And sometimes this moisture is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	 And I have already said before in the division, when I mentioned the diseases, that every ulcer which is not healed or does not appear as raw flesh, this happens for one of these nine causes: either because there is a deficiency of blood in the body; or because it is malicious; or because between it and the lips there is hard flesh preventing the birth of new flesh; or because it is a moving lightness; or because that ulcer itself is rotten and the matter transmitted to it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used for its treatment is unsuitable; or when corruption sets in the region, and it becomes pestilent; or due to the property of the region, as happens in Zaragoza, where the digestion of illnesses is difficult, and the natural healing of abscesses is delayed; or because there is a bone, or many bones, within it.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	 I have already shown all those causes, and their signs and the treatment of them with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	 And it is fitting that I should inform you about the treatment of a fistula which is caused by manual operation.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	 And know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body, for of these are fistulas which reach the great veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the liver, or the intestines, or the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the joints composed like the hand and foot; and of these are those which give proximity to the main member and resemblance.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	 And therefore that of these fistulas which is according to this manner is one of the most difficult illnesses to heal, and it does not receive treatment, and with it there is work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	 And if there is any of these fistulas whose depth does not reach these places that have been mentioned, and you hope and prepare for its treatment, and wish to come to knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or bronze, and if the fistula goes straight, search for it with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	 But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a fine lead probe, because lead with the lightness of its body is easily bent and follows the twists.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	 And if the fistula has terrible openings, it is not possible for you to indicate on it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	 Based on the context and similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, I'll attempt to translate this sentence:
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	 And then you should inquire with precision, according to whatever method is possible for you, to determine if there are bones or nerves here. Is it the cavity of a distant or proximate fistula, or is it a fistula whose opening is covered and located above this? Then, with all your strength, skill, and how you question the patient about their illness, you should discover the cause of the pain through pressure with your hand on the area. Similarly, consider the implications and accidental causes related to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	 And when you have considered all these causes with certainty, then proceed to the treatment with confidence: you must consider whether it is an apparent proximate fistula or in a salty place, distant from a joint, or of nerves, or of arteries, or veins, or one of the places I mentioned to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Then you must dry out the fistula according to what has been said before in its narrative, and remove whatever is in that discharge and of corrupt flesh, and whatever has emerged from the opening of the flesh, whether it be pus or similar, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	 But if the fistula is of distant depth, according to correctness, then you must cut it open as much as possible, and then cleanse it of all its corrupt flesh; and then apply poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have compressed with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	 And do this with some vinegar, until the sharp medicine erodes everything that is soft in the cavity of the fistula's corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	 Then restore it with ointments that promote healthy flesh until it heals.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	 But if it does not heal from this, then you should cauterize it according to our recommendations.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	 But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of this, then you should inquire into it and dry it out according to our recommendations, unless there is some obstacle related to a vein, nerve, or major member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	 But if the bone is exposed and there is any corruption or blackness in it, then you should scrape it until all the corruption is removed; and then treat it with something that will promote healing until it heals.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	 And if it does not heal and instead throws off pus as before, then you should know that you have not completely removed all the corruption; and therefore, you should re-expose it carefully and thoroughly scrape and cleanse it with the strongest potion you have, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	 And therefore, if it is healed, then it is good; and if not, then you should know that this corruption is in the deepest part of the body, which has not been reached, and thus your task here is not to heal but only to alleviate it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	 And if the bone is slightly corrupted and it is within your power to remove it, then you should do so with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	 And if there are many bones, then carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any cause behind with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	 But if any cause of the humidity gives you difficulty, and there is no fear or mistake in their incision, then incise those ligaments or flesh here and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	 But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at this time, then place something on the wound that will keep it open, and leave it until those bones, flesh, and ligaments become softened and decayed, and guard the wound so that it does not heal or close up, and thus the section that you have cut in your operation is constricted.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	 Furthermore, if you fear that it might close up, place on it a piece of cloth soaked in oil or a piece of cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments, for when those ligaments have softened and the bones are separated from them, then extraction becomes easier.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	 The sentence can be translated into English as follows:
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	 Certainly! Let's translate the given sentence line by line:
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	 And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his body, so that you may serve as an example and aid in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	 A young man around 30 years old, to whom pain occurred in his chest, and from the inner parts a tumor grew on the innermost part of the body until the tumor reached the chest, and it is a tumor with a large abscess, and there was no external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	 Then the time was extended with that due to the doctors' mistake until the abscess burst, and foul matter flowed from it, and his treatment was then stopped until the thigh was opened, and there were made in him horrible openings through which all the pus and humors of the body flowed.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	 And then many doctors treated him for about two years, and none of them knew more than the art until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	 And I saw his thigh and the matters that flowed from him through those openings in great quantity; and already the body of that man was all swollen and his color was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	 And then I introduced the probe into one of those openings and the probe reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	 And immediately I investigated all the orifices and found that they were open from all parts of the thigh.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	 And then I cut and incised into one of the orifices that I found an exposed part of the bone, which was corrupt, decayed, and discolored; and already a part of the thigh where it had penetrated to the marrow was corrupted.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	 And then I sawed through what was revealed and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	 And I believed that it was not in the bone itself, but rather the corruption that I had cut out and sawed off, which I had already removed.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	 And then I applied healing ointments to the wound for a long time, but it did not heal.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	 And then I returned and discovered on the bone, following the initial discovery, that there was still corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	 And I sawed away what appeared to be that corruption, and then I tried to cure him and restore his health, but it did not work.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	 And then I discovered another spot on him and did not stop cutting the bone little by little specifically, and I persisted in his restoration, but it did not heal until I had cut around a palm's width of him, which I extracted with its marrow. Then I restored that part with medicines, and it healed slightly and was cured.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	 And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on him or make an incision in him except for the disposition of his weakness and for his lack of tolerance and fear of death, because he falls into a coma at all times due to excessive evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	 Therefore, he is healed by complete healing, and there is nothing hard in the place of bone; and good disposition has been made of him in his body, and his strength returns; and he converses according to his dispositions, and neither does he oppose in walking nor suffer any harm for any reason.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	 But if there is bone protruding in the place of the body that has been wounded, then you should cut it according to this manner: and that is for you to take a ligament and tighten it at the extremity of that protruding bone, and command someone to extend it upward; and place that wool ligament, which is thicker than the first ligament, there; and then tie it over the flesh that is under the bone, and stretch the extremity so that you draw the flesh toward the parts below, and uncover the flesh in the place where you want to saw, so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	 And it is necessary that the stitch be placed little by little on the affected area, because if the corruption is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface to the touch, then another stitch should be made at another time.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	 And if the bone is not prominent but rather flat or continuous with another part, and the corruption is in the middle of the bone or in a part of it, then you should uncover all the skin around; and next place a stick underneath, and next stitch together that first part where the corruption is until the stitches of both parts are connected.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	 And let the stitch be small according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	 And if the corruption is in a joint, cut open that corrupt joint, and stitch together the bone where it continues with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	 And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in the bone but rather in the tendon.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	 And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is very difficult; however, you should investigate how the corruption appears to you, and scrape that area, and clean it according to each possible disposition, and with each tendon straighten it as much as possible without cutting against a vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	 And know that there are various types of saws for cutting these bones, and the choice of saw depends on the location, preparation, thickness, fineness, size, smallness, hardness, and rarity of the bones; therefore, you should prepare all sorts of instruments suitable for the operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	 And know that this operation requires you to be knowledgeable about the type of instrument needed; since you have great experience and long practice in the ways of this art, and as you have already encountered various illnesses, you will place what is appropriate from the instruments for each disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	 And I will instruct you at the end of this chapter on the number of instruments that you will use as simple tools with which you will proceed to your decision, which you will practice on others.
Forma de serra:	 Method of sawing:
Forma de autra serra:	 Another method of sawing:
Forma de autra serra:	 Another way of sawing:
Forma de autra serra gran:	 Method for another large saw:
Forma de ray:	 Method of file:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	 Its head should be shaped like the head of a star-shaped key, and its points should be arranged like the teeth on a saw.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	 And it is not appropriate that only with this are the joints massaged when they are corrupt or the opening is very wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	 A larger form of razor than others.
Forma de razori menor:	 Smaller form of razor
Forma de razori lat:	 Lighter form of razor
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	 Other decently made saw form: let it be made in the shape of a bow, with the sharpness of iron, and its wooden parts properly made.
Forma de lu:	 Shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 Form of razor that has concavity
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 Another subtle form of razor
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 Another form of razor with a curved tip
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 Small form of razor resembling a tenon
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 A form of chisel with which bones are cut
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 Another smaller form of chisel
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 Form of another chisel; this one resembles a ray, and its tip is like a saw, and it is used in many places on the bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 A form of file that is suitable for scraping those bones that are pierced.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 And its tip is triangular and has a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	 And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly, all the handles that we have said for razors, chisels, and saws are needed.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	 The translation of the first sentence is: "About the infection of the extremities and the locking of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	 The translation of the passage is: "The extremities may become infected due to intrinsic or extrinsic causes. If you have treated that infection with those medicines and the treatment does not work, or if sometimes the infection spreads to a member which you do not perceive any cause for, then you must infect that member where the infection occurs, so that the patient escapes from death or major harm to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	 The translation of the passage is: "And the sign of that which occurs is that the member turns black, as if fire has burned it, or you may see a spreading blackness until the putrefaction reaches into that member and spreads throughout the body; thus, beware of the infection in that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	 "Similarly, if the cause of the infection is a poisonous strike from something like a sea scorpion, viper, or similar creature.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	 The translation of the passage is: "And if the infection or strike is on the tip of the finger, then you should infect the finger and not give space for the infection to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	 And similarly, if you access the hand, then you should incise it from the base of the thumb, and do not leave room for corruption until it takes hold in the fire of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	 And if you instead incise that one, then cut into the arm to the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	 And if the corruption passes and it reaches the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and administering any other cause for treatment at this point is futile.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	 And similarly, do the same with the foot when corruption reaches the toe of the foot, then you should incise it to one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	 And if it affects the sole of the foot, then you should incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	 But if it goes up into the shinbone, then you should incise the thigh to the knee joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	 And if the corruption has already spread over the shinbone, then in that case there is nothing to be done except to dismiss [the patient], and leave him to his death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	 The method of incising the limb or sawing it is that you should tie a ligature above where you want to make the incision, and place another ligature on the spot; and the assistant should extend a ligature towards the lower parts, and the assistant should also extend another ligature towards the upper part; and you should separate the flesh that is between the two ligatures with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; and then it can be incised or sawed. 	
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	 And it is necessary that clean cloth be placed around all parts of the wound to prevent contamination, and to bring about a healthy scabbing and controlled pus formation for the patient.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	 But if there is bleeding when you operate, then cauterize the area carefully or place some powder on it to stop the bleeding; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then bind the afflicted member with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	 And I recommend to you that when such an event happens to a man in his foot, this is the accident which we have described, which occurs because of a burning sensation in his foot as if by combustion from fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	 And that corruption begins first in the toe before spreading to the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	 And then that man would prepare for himself a poultice to go to the member with great force, and he would cause that foot to rot until the joint, and it was healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	 A long time later, the same corruption happened to him in the big toe of his left foot.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	 And then he came to me, and I was determined to draw out that excess with water that I placed on the hand of medicines, for the cleansing of his body; but the excess did not draw out, and it began to go to the other toe of his left foot.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	 And he asked me to cut his hand off, and I did not want to do that, fearing the repercussions of that excessiveness, and also because I was afraid of the death of the patient, for the strength of the patient was on the decline.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	 And since he despaired of me, he returned to his homeland and word came back to me that that man had his entire hand cut off and was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	 And I have recounted this story only to be helpful in regard to this affliction and that it may serve as an indication by which it may be recognized and treated accordingly.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	 On the care of the sinews and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	 When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged to the point where it collects pus, and then it bursts and is perforated, and the pus exits from it, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is above it is also thin like fine cloth, and no further corruption has reached it, and it does not press on the bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinew, and not a fistula. iety
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	 "However, if the space is prolonged until corruption takes hold in some part of the body, it is then called a fistula and not ulcer.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	 "And the treatment for it is that you should introduce a cord or string entirely like this, especially when it is made thin and shaped like cloth, ensuring that it does not adhere to the affected area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	 "However, if you hope that the cord will adhere and that the corruption has not yet reached its final stage, and the cord has a smooth surface, then treat it with an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	 "And consider the groin, and if it is large and the arm has an unpleasant odor, then treat it with an enema made of Egyptian medicine, which consists of oil, vinegar, and honey, mixed in equal parts in a vessel, heated over a fire until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	 "And then you take from it the necessary amount and dissolve it in water and honey; and treat the groin with that mixture, strengthening its opening, and leave the medicine in place for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	 And then extract it with contempt; and do this for so many days until the wound is cleansed and the smell removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	 And sometimes it is administered an enema with ash water, when this remedy is not at hand; and you must take the ash of grapevines, put it in water, then use that to administer the enema until you are certain that the wound has stopped bleeding.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	 And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian remedy or the ash water, then administer an enema with water and honey mixed together, and after that administer another enema with wine and honey mixed, for it is the property of honey to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the wound adhere, especially when the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	 And when you do this several times and are certain that the wound has stopped bleeding, then administer an enema with water that promotes flesh growth in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	 And you should take some ointment of dyafinicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or you can administer an enema with some other medicines and ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	 And if the orifice of the anus is too narrow to admit the cannula for the enema, then gradually widen it with a small iron instrument, and place in it a cloth wrapped in Egyptian or basilic ointment until it is widened enough.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	 And similarly, if the orifice is too large, then apply a stitch to its lips and leave it in place for as long as needed for the enema without adding anything.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	 And if the orifice from which the arm extends is elevated towards the upper parts, then dry it with a poultice in the lowest place of it so that the arm may run below, because when the arm is compressed at the anus, flesh is generated in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	 And if it is not possible to dry the anus within the environment of the hip bone as you wish, then prepare the member with a preparation that allows the arm to pass through lightly as is apparent to you and that there is in it no obstruction to the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	 And take strengthening medicines which are placed on the anus as needed, and extend those on a linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	 And let the cloth be of such size as to cover all of the anus; and then with scissors make a small incision on the right side of the orifice of the anus, wider than the orifice by a little; and then extend over another linen cloth the leonine ointments according to the size of the incision, and place it over that for a long time away from the orifice of the anus so that the arm is relieved of its exit and do not remove the large cloth except once after several days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	 Based on the context and the similarity of the language to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	 And so that you may know if what comes out of his arm is too much or too little, or whether it is digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	 And thus you should also consider the location of that vein, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	 And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the material that has been applied to the opening of the vein begins to adhere or nearly adheres, then on the second or third day, you should remove it or loosen it, and when you uncover the wound, change the bandage for a new one and apply fresh ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	 However, if from the vein a little space is left empty and fine pus escapes, do not despair of its adhesion, for the healing of it is near, because there are some men in whom the generation of flesh in their wounds is slow, and others in whom the opposite happens.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	 And if from the vein after many days undigested blood comes out, you should know that the vein does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the vein is delayed and the cause prolonged, then you must adapt the medicine towards drying, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and power, they become dry like diachylon ointment when superfluous addition of wax is made to it.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	 And the most effective treatment is to take diaphoretic ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and then apply it generously on the patient's affected area, and then cover it with cloth, and use it in that manner.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	 And when there is no ointment available, do the following: take myrrh, aloe, and sesame seeds, grind them all together into a powder and sprinkle it over the honey that has been heated on the fire; then place a cloth soaked in this mixture over the affected area; and also apply the honey that you have heated until it becomes thick, spread it over a cloth and place it firmly over the wound. 	(This passage describes an alternative treatment using natural ingredients when diaphoretic ointment is not available.)
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	 And sometimes, certain long and thin herbs such as celestial lily (and this is celestial lily) and centaury are administered with it, and use these simple or compound drugs: grind them, sift them, and sprinkle the powder over the honey that you have collected; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	 And if the wound is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in its depth, and now make an investigation in the bones or other hard parts or ligaments; then treat it with fistula treatment, as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	 Here is a line-by-line translation of your provided text:
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	 Based on the pattern you've provided and my understanding of medieval medical texts, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	 And so, when you have that water which we mentioned in the division and do not proceed with your treatment, then it is necessary for you to incise with iron all the remaining superfluity from the nail, and afterwards cauterize the wound with this, because cautery is very helpful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 But if the bone is raw and the nail is healthy, and the excess of the nail already presses the flesh into the parts inside, and begins to prick and hurt it, then it is necessary for you to place a subtle ray underneath the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and push it up and easily incise that flesh, and place on what remains of the flesh medicines that are burning corrosives until everything is removed; and afterwards cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	 But if the corruption has already spread to the bone, then it is necessary for you to incise that bone and remove it, because it will not heal as long as there is a corrupt bone within it.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you see that the corruption and the rot are spreading to the finger, then you should incise it at one of its joints according to where its memory is most prominent, and afterwards cure it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	 Based on the text you've provided and my understanding of medieval medical terminology, here's a line-by-line translation:
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	 Sure, here is the translation of the given text:
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	 And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or it is their birth in some nodes of those mentioned.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	 But he who is born in some nodes of the finger does not get worse, and this one who is born in the joints grows very ill.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	 And of those that are born fleshy, the incision is lighter, and it is that you must make a longitudinal cut along its root with a lancet.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	 But of him who is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, beware of his suppuration.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 But in him who is born in the finger at the nodes, it is necessary that you make an initial incision of the flesh with a round cut towards the bone, and then close it with one of those suitable needles for this purpose, and then cure it so that it may be healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	 But the consolidation that happens to the said nodes whether by birth of man in this way or by scarring from a wound or burn or by similar causes, then it is necessary to cut through this consolidation until the nodes return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	 And then place between them linens soaked in rose oil to prevent easy consolidation, and separate them with a thin lead sheet until they are consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	 And similarly, if consolidation occurs in the said part with the palm, then you dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adapted to the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	 From an incision of veins, there are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	 Veins are varicose veins, and they are large, twisted veins full of melancholic excess that often appear in the limbs of the body, with the most common occurrence being in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and bearers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	 Therefore, it is necessary that you administer a purgative of black bile to the body several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	 But the treatment of them with iron is according to two methods: one is that it be incised and drawn out, that black blood; and the other method is that the vein be raised up and completely removed.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	 The incision of it is according to this method: at the beginning, soak the leg with hot water until the thick blood, which is sludge from the leg, is dissolved; then bind the patient's leg to the upper part of the thigh, between the knee and the groin, with a bandage. Then make an incision in one place, or two, or three with a wide cut, and then raise the black blood with your left hand from the lower part of the leg upwards and downwards, until the desired amount and as much as is needed for the patient's good health has been taken out.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	 And then bind it, and command him to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	 And repeat the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this is noticed by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	 But their elevation should be done in this manner: you who raise the patient's leg, if there are hairs on him, first shave him; then put his leg in a bath and immerse it in hot water until it reddens and the veins become swollen; or if he is to be exercised by strong exercise, if a bath is not available, do so until the member is scratched.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	 Then dry the string on the right side of the vein by cutting it in the length or behind him you will find the kidney, or lower down you will find the ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	 Then open the string with scissors and completely strip the vein until it appears to the touch, and it is at this point that you will see a darker hue approaching.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	 And thus when you remove the string and from it you see that white thread, it should be a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	 Then place it underneath so that it is lifted and freed from the string, and suspend it with an empty needle.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	 Here's the translation of your provided sentence:
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	 And do this: remove that which is the most superior or highest part of all sections until it has been completely removed; and then incise that area.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	 And if you cannot remove and elevate it, then insert a double-threaded needle with a strong cord and ligate it, or insert underneath it the thread and rotate your hand in all directions until it is expelled.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	 And be careful not to cut it; because if it breaks, it will be difficult for you to elevate that part and it will come back on the patient causing harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And when that part has been completely expelled, then place over the wound site wool soaked in wine and both olive oil and non-olive oil, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	 And if the vein is twisted and has twisting at which it is folded in parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut along that part of the twisting on it and at the folding places of it, and then suspend it with hooks until you lift all of it.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	 And you must be careful with your cut that you do not cut the vein and that you do not damage it, because it will be difficult for you to lift it; and keep your skill in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	 The form of the incident with which the life is dried out (or "with which life has been dried out").
Forma de unci orp:	 The shape/form of swollen fingers.
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	 It is not directed at the joints as with fingers nor does it have an acute end to avoid damaging the vein; and it has a thick flexibility like a lion's, because if it were thin, it would pierce the vein due to its thinness; they are in excessively large amounts on him, just as we said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	 Of the extraction of the calf vein (or "veins of the leg/lower limb").
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	 This vein is produced in the lower legs, as well as in al-Ateg (a place in Arabia) and in the dry and arid lands of India, where there are few trees, no grass, or any other vegetation.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	 It is also generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	 And its generation is from putrefaction, which comes out of the colon like poison within the body of snakes, worms, scorpions and maggots that generate between the colon and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	 And the sign of the acceptance of its coming is that this vein appears in the leg with a very intense inflammation; and immediately the area swells; and then the vein begins to emerge from the site of that swelling, appearing as if it were cut by a blade.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	 And then when the extremity emerges from him, it is necessary that you wrap around it a weight of lead which weighs one or two pounds, and tie it so that the lead hangs from the thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	 And as many times as you draw anything out of him for any reason, wrap it in lead and tie it up.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	 And if it is prolonged, then you cut off a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut it straight until it has been drawn out, for if you cut it straight, it constricts and enters into the flesh and causes an abscess and pus in that place and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	 Therefore, it is necessary that it be pulled gently and gradually until it is completely removed from him, and that nothing remains in his body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	 And this vein is drawn out in some men to a length of five palms and ten fingers, and it has come to me that one was drawn out of twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	 And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert the ray into its wound and pierce it with a long incision through the body until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then treat it according to the cure for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	 And sometimes this vein has many branches, particularly when it reaches the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, and comes to each orifice, and exits from every orifice branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	 And therefore cure it thus as we have said in the division and with that which has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	 About the cutting of worms generated under the skin, and it is called "bovine illness".
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	 This illness is called in some lands "bovine illness" because it often happens to cattle and it is a worm that is born between the skin and the flesh, and goes through all the body, ascending and descending, and shows its movement from member to member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	 And its generation is from the putrefaction of some humors, just like worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	 And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and reaches the head, and arrives at the eye, then it quickly blows up in it and enters and destroys the eye, and this often happens.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	 Therefore, when you want to cure that and extract it, do not do so unless by the sensation of its movement and appearance, and then it is necessary that you have something above it and something below it with a strong bandage and constriction, and then dry it out on top and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if it is inflamed in the flesh and you do not find anything there, then place a cautery with fire on the spot until death, and the main cause to be feared is corruption of it which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	 And if you see that it has reached the head near the eye, then strengthen the eyelid with a strong ligature, and dry it out, and extract it; and it is necessary for the patient to use purifying remedies for their body with medicines that evacuate putrid humors, and beware of foods that cause putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	 About the incision for pain in the nose.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	 This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and it also changes from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	 And I have seen this as I will now tell you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	 I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm, and after it had been cut for an hour, I saw that inflammation move as if it were a worm going upward, but more slowly than a worm, as if it were quicksilver when it runs from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	 And then the pain will go away from that place and enter into the muscle, and here it stays for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	 And then it moves to another part of the body until it reaches the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	 And then I realized that it was circulating throughout the entire body, just as I had seen; and I was greatly amazed at the changes in him and the speed with which it moved from one limb to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	 And I had already seen this in my own feet according to that manner, but I have rarely seen others whose pain is transferred from limb to limb.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	 But I did not see it in the same way with the feet as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	 And I did not think it was anything other than that the woman was old, with dry body and open veins, and in this way she felt that wind moving around.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	 And it is necessary that this should not appear as a result of treatment in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with closed veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	 And when you want to treat him, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent in the foot as we have said; then you should strengthen that [area] and gently and carefully press on it until that constricted wind has come out, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
De extraccio de sagetas.	 From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	 Arrows are diverse according to their types and the parts of the body they strike, for their diversity lies in those that have large tips, small ones, concave, blunt, solid; and those with three angles; and those with tongues; and those with spikes.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	 And that which is according to the members and parts of the body it strikes is in two manners: for the members are either principal or secondary organs, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs; and therefore when it hits one of these members and you see signs of mortal danger (which I will explain later), then you must avoid extracting that arrow from those in whom death is most imminent. But when you do not see these bad signs and the arrow is not lodged deep within the member, then you may extract it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	 And the signs of imminent death are when an arrow strikes someone and passes through the bone and exits from the fontanelle which is on top of the brain; for it causes severe headache, visual disturbance, vertigo, burning in the eyes, swelling and burning of the tongue, convulsions and clouding of consciousness, vomiting of bile, and a weak and severed speech, and white fluid similar to dust issues from the wound site, and the patient resembles someone with edema of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	 When you see these signs, then you should abstain from the treatment and the removal of the arrow, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	 However, the signs of an arrow when it hits the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and you can feel that it is stuck in something hard, not something soft; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse, and black blood comes from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and a foul smell, and fainting; and thus you know that death approaches without doubt.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	 And the signs when the arrow has struck the lung are foaming blood from the wound, and the veins near the neck are swollen, and the patient's color changes, and there is rapid breathing or a strong desire to breathe cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	 And if the arrow strikes the diaphragm, which is near the feet, then the pain is near the lower ribs, and there is great difficulty breathing with intense pain and sighing, and all the limbs' muscles do not move well.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	 And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then undigested food will come out of the wound very quickly.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	 And if the arrow hits the abdomen and is lodged in the patient, check for any opening or tear in the wound, such as the skin, tissue, or intestines that may be damaged, and do not expect a cure unless you remove the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	 And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine is exiting from outside of the patient, and there is any sign of infection or swelling in the surrounding area, and the patient experiences severe pain, then you should know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	 However, the other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, armpits, spine, collarbone, ribs, thighs and their respective parts of the body can be saved according to greater dispositions when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not poisoned.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	 I recommend this to you because I have seen the effect of these arrows, so that you may understand the treatment accordingly.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	 The cause of this is that in one man, an arrow struck his lacrimal duct near the root of his nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the arrowhead in his ear canal, and he was cured without any harm to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	 And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had struck him in the gray of his eye, just below the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden, and only a small tip remained attached to its shaft, and it was a large arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with iron lion on which there were no feathers.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	 And the Jew died, and it did not happen to him from a bad wound.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	 And another arrow was extracted from a Christian man, which had been shot into his throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one with feathers; and then I cut along that between two bones, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I was very careful with it, and I immediately extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	 And another arrow was extracted from a man who had been struck in the belly, and I thought he would die from it; and thus, after thirty days had passed and nothing changed in his condition, I cut along the arrow and pulled it out, and he was healed, and no bad accident happened to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	 And I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his back, and the wound had healed over it, and after seven years, the arrow came out by itself through the flesh of the body.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	 And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had stuck in her belly, and the wound is healed inside, and it has not changed its position, and the woman does not suffer harm in any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	 And I saw another man in whom an arrow had stuck in his face and the wound is healed and the arrow is broken, not finding any pain here, and this has similar symptoms.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	 And I extracted the arrow from the king's man who was stuck in the middle of his nose and had already deviated slightly to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	 And I was called to care for him immediately after the arrow entered three days ago.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	 And then I found the arrow wound very narrow; and then I examined it with a fine probe, but did not feel it; however, he felt pain below his right ear, and then I suspected that this pain was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	 And I covered the area with a plaster containing attracting and digestive virtues, intending that the place swell up so that the location of the arrow appears to me, so that it can be cut over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	 And do not assume that the accident in that place is significant because an arrow has reached that place; and I continued with the plaster over him for many days, and no accident occurred; and the wound was healing in the meantime, and the patient was recovering from the extraction for many days, until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and told me this.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	 And then I applied a sharp, corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up, and with a probe, I searched for that, and found the subtle tip of the arrow, which was attached to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	 And then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow became clearly visible to me, and it took four months for this to happen.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	 And then because the wound was widened, and it became possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and they remained there without coming out, I did not cease trying and inventing on that with various devices until one day I began to pull it out with a properly made forceps, as will be shown in the form of those at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	 And some doctors believed that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I restored it and the wound has healed, and the patient is cured completely, with no aftereffects whatsoever.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	 And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows, so that you may apply this rule and significance to what has not been said, for the divisions of this art and their definitions are not understood by simple narration nor do they comprehend those who read the books.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	 And wise craftsmen compare with few words; and that which is present with that which is absent; and they discover new operations and new instruments from the descent of the strange causes of the art when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	 And therefore I say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they have entered except according to two methods: either by attraction of the place where it has entered, or by the contrary of the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	 And that which is thrown by the place where it has entered, or is an arrow proceeding into a fleshy place, and it is pulled out and expelled.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	 And if it does not obey the extraction in the hour when it falls, then you should leave it for some days until the flesh around it softens, and its attraction and exit are eased.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	 And similarly, if the point is placed in the bone and does not obey you by coming out, then leave it there for a few days and apply a drawing and moistening ointment to it each day, until it comes out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	 And if it does not obey you by coming out after some days, then you must pierce around the tip of the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine probe until the location is widened by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	 And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and has proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of those signs I mentioned appear in the patient, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it there until its being is equalized for a few days; because if the arrow reaches the cistern, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	 And if the arrow is stuck only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the cistern, and the patient remains for a few days without experiencing any of those signs, then you should endeavor to draw out the arrow and also to heal the patient.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 But if it is deeply lodged and does not obey you by coming out, then you should administer fine probes around the arrow as we have recommended, and then care for the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	 "However, if the arrow is already embedded in the body and is hidden from feeling, then you should investigate with your hand, and if you feel it, then remove it with suitable instruments for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	 "And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves or veins here, then cut around the wound until it is enlarged enough to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	 "And if there are bones on which the arrow is lodged, then you should cut away the flesh around it from all sides as much as you can; and manage to extract it by evading the fracture of the bones and their twisting until it comes out.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	 "And when you perform the extraction of the arrow from any place it is located, then use with twisting of your hand and forceps from all sides until it yields; and be cautious with great caution so that the arrow is not broken and that you make the difficult extraction as easy as possible.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	 "And if you cannot extract it at that moment, then leave it for some days until the surrounding parts can be softened, and then try again when it has become more relaxed.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	 "But if there is opposition due to blood flow, then administer what has been said about treatment in its respective chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	 "And be careful not to cut into a vein, nerve, or cord; administer cold in any way possible to relieve the arrow's sting; do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness, as I have recommended to you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	 "And thus, perform the opposite of what the arrow does, so that the patient is in a position similar to the one in which they were shot with the arrow, because this is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	 "But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the patient's condition.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	 "But the arrows that are thrown from one side to another, or if any part of them protrudes outwards, or if the tip of the arrow is bent due to the pressure of the protruding part above the fletching, then you should cut it off at that point; and the cutting should be according to the amount that the forceps can grasp; and then pull it out, because it comes out easily.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	 If the arrow is lodged in the bone, then you twist it according to its opposition until the arrowhead presses into the bone, and expand yourself in the process, and then remove it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	 Otherwise, leave it there for several days, and then try again until it comes out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	 And if the shaft of the arrow is still in it, then you push it out with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	 But if the shaft has broken off and you wish to administer an impulse, then you insert something concave into it, such as a spoon or similar instrument, so that its convexity enters the rear of the arrowhead, and then push it out with it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	 But if the arrow is concave, then you push it out with a strong instrument that enters it, because the arrow is weakened by this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	 And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you cut out all the flesh in which the venom is located, if it is possible to do so, and then treat the wound with an appropriate remedy.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And if the arrow hits the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and it is accessible so that you can touch it with your finger, and it is possible to cut over it, then cut over it and be careful not to sever a vein or nerve, and remove it, and then close the wound if necessary, and treat it until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	 "A type of forceps with which arrows are drawn:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	 "Their tips are like the beak of a bird, made with serrations, and when they grasp the arrow, they do not let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	 "And from these [forceps] are made various instruments, large, few, and slender, according to the size of the arrow and its thinness, as well as the extent of the wound and the constriction caused by it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	 "The form of an extractor with this concave tip is similar to the quill of a bird, so that the insertion of the arrow in the body is made easier and the extraction of the barbed part [of the arrow] is facilitated.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	 "Form of an extractor with a hooked tip:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	 "like a fishhook, so that its insertion into the concave arrow is made easier and it is extracted with it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	 "About the bloodletting of veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	 "The veins commonly used for bloodletting are XXX, of which there are XVI in the head: two pulsating veins near the ears, known as auricularis; two veins that run on each temple; two veins that run along the lacrimal ducts of both eyes, called ophthalmic; one vein located in the middle of the forehead; one vein at the tip of the nose; two jugular veins at the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip—these are known as labial—and there are two veins under the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	 This text appears to be discussing different veins and their locations in the body, specifically those found in the arms. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	 This text appears to be discussing the veins in the foot and leg (camba). Here's a line-by-line translation:
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	 The treatment for the veins near the ears is for ancient cataracts, migraines, and old head wounds.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	 And the manner of bleeding these veins is as I have told you: it should be done at the top of the patient's head, and the top of the patient's head should be rubbed in the occipital area where both veins are located, with a broad cloth and good friction; then tightly bind the patient's neck with a bandage until the two veins and their locations appear near the ears on the two depressed areas of the head; and you will seek that with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, this is a sign.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	 Then you take the scalpel, and it is the one that cuts, and then you insert it under the vein at the hollow of the bone until the phlebotomist comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	 And then raise your hand with the vein and the hollow above the parts and cut the vein with a cutting incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	 And let the length of the incision be about two finger widths or around that; and allow as much blood to flow out as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And then strengthen with poultices and leave it there until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	 And already at the beginning of the book, I have described their incisions and cauterizations.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	 But of the two arterial veins in the temples, the aid of phlebotomy is for chronic migraine and sudden blindness, and sharp acute flows to the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	 And the method of bleeding these is as I recommend to you: constrict the patient's neck with one hand until the two veins appear clearly to the touch, and demonstrate their pulse under your finger; then you may proceed with caution.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 And then you raise the skin above the vein with your index finger, and insert the phlebotomy knife underneath, and lift the vein up; and cut it as you have done with the other two veins; and allow the blood to flow according to your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And then loosen the bandage from the patient, and place your finger over the vein for an hour, and then place a cloth and poultice on it, and strengthen it with a strong constriction, and leave it there until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	 And already preceded is the reminder of them, and from those the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	 And therefore the bloodletting of the vein in the forehead is similar to the bloodletting of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face, migraine, fever, and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And the manner of bloodletting is as I have advised you: the patient should grasp their head with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take the instrument, called a fleam, which looks like this:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Place the tip of the fleam at the top of the vein and strike it with the handle or another suitable object, allowing the blood to flow according to the desired amount. Then remove the instrument from the patient and hold the area until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	 And sometimes it is opened with a broad bloodletting instrument, but the bloodletting instrument should not be too sharp at the tip like other instruments; rather, it should have a blunt tip, and you should perform the bloodletting along the transverse direction, because the bone is close to the surface and easily broken by a fine instrument.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	 "But the treatment for the two veins that are in the tear ducts of both eyes, due to itching of the eye from heat and pus, is for eye diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	 "And the method of bloodletting is for the patient to hold their head with a bandage, then proceed to bleed them, and you should be standing over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	 "And the bloodletting should be done according to the width of the vessel with a little more length, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the vessel is thin, it is very likely that its end will break.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 "And then let the blood run as much as is necessary for you, and press on that vein, and hold it for one night, and then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	 "But bloodletting from the nose vein is suitable for acute fever and severe headache, as well as facial diseases, migraines, and heat in the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	 "And the method of bloodletting for this is that the patient should hold their head and then you take their nose with your left hand, choose a fine, long lancet, place it in the middle of the top of the nose according to its direction, because the vein does not appear here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	 Certainly! Let's translate the given text into English step by step:
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	 Here's the translation of the given text:
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	 And then proceed to perform phlebotomy on the long vein with a small phlebotome, gradually; and then extract blood according to the required amount or as necessary; and then do the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	 And then release the ligature and strengthen both veins with a tighter one to prevent the patient from being overwhelmed; leave it for the night until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	 And the benefit of phlebotomy on the prominent veins is that it helps to treat small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, as well as gum disease, ulcers, and fissures; it also heals ulcers present in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	 And the quality of phlebotomy on those [veins] is that you make the patient sit before you and strengthen his neck with a bandage, and then turn back his lips and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the indication of each is by their blackness, and this is because in the vicinity of those [veins] are small black veins; and then cut each one with an incising cut.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	 But if there is doubt about which one to choose and you do not know which one it is, then you should make an incision on the larger and more apparent of the two.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	 And make a cut similar to the two veins that are in the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	 But it is more common to incise both veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	 But the two veins that are below the tongue are also used for the phlebotomy of the cephalic, for precautions that are in the throat, and for diseases of the uvula and mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	 And the way to bleed those veins is to follow the patient's tongue between your fingers in front of the sun, lift up their tongue, and look under the tongue; from one side will come one vein, and from the other side another vein, and each one's color inclines towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	 And then bleed each one; and be careful not to cut your hand while bleeding those veins, because below them are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And the veins that are bled in the elbow are those that are common to all men, and their bleeding is done in two ways: either they place with the phlebotomy mirtilat or olive at subtleness; or with the cutting flebotomy knife, which is called alnessil, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	 And this herb is suitable for cutting and its specific varieties are fine and subtle according to the size of the veins and according to their narrowness.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	 "Form of venesection in the arm
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	 It should be done as many times as necessary, and it is suitable for opening the large, full veins that are clearly visible and contain thick, impure blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	 And this is the form of venesection in the hand.
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	 And this venesection is of smaller size and more subtle at the end, suitable for venesection of fine veins that contain thin yellow blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	 However, the benefit of venesection of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins, is that it draws blood from patients with dropsy or jaundice, and also from those who have swollen feet or a distended abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	 And it is appropriate for the venesector to be very careful and to exercise caution during this venesection, because there is an artery underneath it. If he errs in the puncture of the vein, he will cut the artery and cause a flow of blood. Therefore, one should not perform this venesection with a pointed lancet, but rather should first incise it with a knife.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if the basilica does not appear due to obvious swelling, then it is necessary for you to leave that one and move to another, or seek any branch of it; or perform a phlebotomy at the end of the arm, because that is obvious; and afterwards perform a phlebotomy on the other side as well, just as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	 But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the same person, then it is necessary to touch the area in front of the constriction of the arm until you recognize the pulse point; and then mark over it with a pen; and then tie the arm and immediately cut the vein with a concave section, performing phlebotomy on the other side as well, just as we have said; and be careful that the incision is not too close to the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	 And when you see that upon tightening the ligature, there is swelling in the place marked with ink, then this swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	 And if you see the blood flow from the phlebotomy like a child's urine, and the blood is thin and red, then know that it is the blood of the artery; and then quickly place your finger over it for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the bleeding has stopped, because many times it stops, then tighten the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	 And keep watch over the patient's discharge, and be attentive to him and do not move him for several days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	 But if the blood is not cut, and there is no medicine available, then you should cut the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity is contracted, and the blood has been cut off. Or take a tourniquet of cloth, make that, and take half of it and strengthen that over the vein with a tight bandage and pulp until the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	 And then if the blood is cut off, it is good; and if not, then cure him with water of which the memory of the place of the powder cutting off the blood flow has been recalled.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	 And the cutting off of his blood is difficult in many ways because of the small size of the wound and the possibility of damaging the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	 But phlebotomy of the dark vein is advantageous because it draws blood from the upper part of the head down to the torso; this is due to its being composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	 If the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein lengthwise.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	 The benefit of bleeding the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and helps with eye disorders.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	 In this case specifically, if you want the bloodletting to be done with an olive-shaped or a myrtle-shaped fleubotomi; because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not touch any artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	 However, you must ensure that with the bloodletting instrument you do not puncture only the tip of the arm, but look for a lighter spot, and do not touch the bone unless it is found with the first percussion that there are some veins in that area to be bled.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	 However, it is very light in some people when they are not bled on the first percussion, but do not touch that swelling afterwards.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	 But the quality of bleeding from this vein and its complications are important, in which you should consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	 The first thing is that you should know that bloodletting is administered only for the preservation of health and with hope and caution to prevent illnesses, and that it should be done on one of the veins in the elbow, which are: cephalic, dark and basilic; and that bloodletting should be done at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter before a meal, when there are signs of fullness.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	 And let a bloodletting be performed on the third day or within the first three hours of the morning.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	 But bloodletting that is administered must be done when it is convenient and necessary, whether at night or day, at any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	 And it is not advisable to bleed a child until they are fourteen years old, and a pregnant woman should only be bled between the fourth and seventh month, and the elderly who have passed sixty years should not be bled.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	 And when someone wants to be bled in any way, it is advisable that they cleanse their intestines before the bloodletting with a cleansing enema, if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not attract the superfluities of the purified intestines in the bloodletting, which are harmful and can affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	 And patients with certain diseases should not be bled: nausea, drunkenness, or those who are recovering from illness or intoxication until it has left them, nor those with dropsy; and bloodletting should especially be avoided during colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, increased coitus, labor, fasting exercises, vigils, and any cause that weakens the vital force, whether of the body or soul.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	 And then carefully consider in subtlety of the humors before this, if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medicines if it is suitable for them.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	 And then enter a bath if nothing prohibits it, or exercise with some exercise so that the blood may be refined.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And perform phlebotomy on him around midday, specifically during the third hour of the day, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	 And ensure that the feet of this patient are protected on that day from all animal accidents, such as distress, anger, fear, and from all bodily discomforts, such as work and excessive fatigue, and sexual activity and similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	 And at his bedside, have present the causes in the use of which it is customary for men to use aromatics and fragrances, and balms, and similar things according to their ability.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	 And let the phlebotomist sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	 And then remove the patient's arm and rub it with his hand, the phlebotomist, two or three times; and then tie the bandage tightly with a strap and wrap it around twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	 And let the stricture be tempered, for if the stricture is not equal or the stricture is with superfluity, then prohibit the flow of blood; or it is with softening, and then prohibit the body from evacuating blood.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	 And for the stricture, it is necessary that he who must be phlebotomized should rub his hands together until the veins are swollen and can be easily felt.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	 And the phlebotomist should anoint his phlebotomy tool with a little appropriate oil; and he should place his left index finger on that vein, in the area where he wishes to perform the phlebotomy, so that the vein swells a little and the pulsation is calmed. For of the veins is the one which you should flee when performing phlebotomy, and this is the one filled with windiness. When you place the phlebotomy tool on it, it contracts; you should not perform phlebotomy on this vein, and if you do, it is too narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	 Therefore, for this reason the phlebotomist should be skilled and attentive to all these considerations.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	 Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	 "And if the location is filled with pus or the patient is feverish, then you should leave it for one day or two without touching the bandage, because strongly pulling on a pus-filled wound will cause pus to come out forcefully and will not enter the bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	 "And then perform bloodletting if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	 "And if the opening is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out, then perform bloodletting in that vein according to what is correct and appropriate, and adjust the opening a little. Do this quickly before the wound becomes filled with pus, for in many men, a small opening is sufficient.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	 "But if you see that it is already filled with pus, then do not cut into it, for it does not need any further cutting; and place on it a piece of linen cloth soaked in oil, because this alleviates the body from blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	 "And it is better in this case to use olive oil than other types of oil.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	 "And similarly, apply a piece of linen cloth soaked in oil to every bloodletting where you are bleeding the veins to prohibit the body from losing too much blood, and place theriac, alfadoc, or sage over it after applying one of these to the wound, because the blood becomes thinner and is better when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	 And if in the location of the phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, which often happens, especially to those who have not been bled except for this time, or upon the opening of the vein a little, then you cut and place over the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly scalded, and keep it there for one hour, because it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	 And let him do this near the exit of the blood from that vein or another one.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	 And if some darkness or greenish color remains in the area for several days, do not be concerned; and if you wish, place over it some aloe and myrrh dissolved in water, or some mint juice or calamine, or something similar to that.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	 And often these abscesses and swellings require phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	 And therefore place your hand over it, and if you find softness, keep your compression on it, because that swelling is bad; and then be careful not to place over it any water-based remedy we have mentioned, for the blood will flow strongly from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And make a plaster with water in which there is an astringent property, so that the area may be hardened, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	 And it is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the amount of their virtue and according to the predominant color of the blood that appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	 Because if the blood is black, then you let it run out until it turns red; and likewise if you see it thick, then you let it run out until it becomes thin; and likewise if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	 And it is necessary for someone who is full and strong and has the need to extract blood in one time, that the phlebotomy of the vein be made wide and the incisions be large.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	 And in someone who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary for him to extract blood in many times, and that the wound be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	 And the best practice in venous phlebotomy is that it should be a transverse cut, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	 And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from bleeding and injury to nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	 And to which it is customary for syncope to occur, you should perform phlebotomy. It is necessary that you prepare the patient before phlebotomy with a small amount of bread infused in vinegar or simple oxymel; and extract from the blood three or four times.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	 And if there is a chill from a cold, then before phlebotomy take bread infused in syrup of myrrh or honey syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in strongly scented aromatic syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	 And if syncope occurs during phlebotomy and the cause is loss of much blood, then it is necessary to give to drink a mixture of meat water and strongly scented syrup; use aromatics with aloe, and anoint their feet with it.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	 And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncope for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	 And whoever wants to extend their arm and dissolve their blood slowly, it is necessary for the one whose phlebotomy is for great evacuation and whose strength is weak, that they should let out the blood little by little, according to the strength of the patient in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	 "But whoever wants to try his arm and throw out his blood again, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	 "But whoever wants to draw blood from the opposite side of where they are inclined, it is necessary that this be done on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	 "But in a body where much blood has already been removed and it is weakened and causes fever, it should be drawn again once and in great quantity, and the opening should be enlarged until fainting occurs, since you will have maintained all the conditions of phlebotomy; and you should place your hand on his pulse to prevent death instead of fainting, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	 "And it is not necessary that when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, after having already closed the orifice of the vein and made it difficult for the blood to come out, that you press with great force and slightly bend the arm, because this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	 "Have the patient lie down until he is phlebotomized a second time; or remain with the acuity of the coagulated blood in the vein's orifice; or place on it theriac aloe, or sage, and compress it lightly until the blood has come out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	 And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	 And if necessity prompts you to bleed the patient, and there is no excuse not to, then bleed them in that same spot or in another vein in the other arm.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	 And the vein called "funis of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the cephalic or basilic veins when these are not found or hidden, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	 And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient put their hand in hot water until the needle reddens and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	 And then it should be tightened with a ligature of fine string; and then phlebotomize according to the small transverse vein, not longitudinally or along its length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	 And let the opening be wide and your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize that spot on the joint of the hand be small.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	 And if the flow of blood is obstructed, then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you have achieved your necessity.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	 If you are in the days of summer, then you are exempt from the immersion of the hand in hot water, and the same is done with the body in hot water during wintertime.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	 And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins, because there are no pulsating veins or nerves below it.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	 And the phlebotomy of the little finger on the right hand is suitable for liver ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	 And the way to perform this phlebotomy is by tightening the hand with a ligature or your own hand, after you have placed it in hot water until the vein is swollen and well visible; then make an incision across it; if you do not get enough blood from that, it will not matter.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	 And be careful not to cut your hand with the phlebotomy, because below that are the nerves of the fingers exposed without flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	 Then immerse the hand again in hot water and let the blood run out of it, because if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein, and its flow will be blocked.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	 And when the blood is drawn according to the necessary amount, then you should place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not become clotted easily; and similarly, you should do this for every narrow branch [vein].
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	 But the benefit of bloodletting on the left arm is that it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	 And do similarly in the bloodletting of the other [arm] as you have done with the first one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	 And the benefit of bloodletting from the saphenous vein is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as uterine diseases, and retention of menses, and skin and old ulcers on the thighs, and similar diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	 And the method of bloodletting from there is that the patient should place their foot in hot water and rub it until the veins appear; then tie a band around the ankle; and where the vein becomes visible, you should make incisions with sharp words [knife].
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	 And therefore, bloodletting from the largest vein below the knee is best and safest.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	 Certainly! Let's translate the provided sentence:
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	 "And summon the bloodletting expert.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	 "But if the expulsion of blood is forbidden, then you immerse the patient's foot in hot water and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	 "And if the bloodletting expert errs in the first attempt, then you should try again with a little bit of bloodletting, for the place is healthy; and do not fear the patient's cunning, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	 "And similarly, do with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	 "And for the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, below the heel and behind the wild part of the leg.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	 "And the benefit of bloodletting from that patient is to alleviate hip pain when it is due to cold blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	 "And the quality of the bloodletting from that patient is that you have the patient enter a bath, and hurry and strengthen his thigh with four threads on a long, fine bandage over the heel, for it appears only like this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	 "And when it appears, then you bloodlet that according to each method that is possible for you and according to the direction, which is better; or you incise that by incision or dry that by cauterization, because the place of him is healthy.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	 And it is very common in many men; and if you find this condition, and it does not affect the whole body, then some people call it fleubotoma, which appears on the back of the foot between the so-called auricular and anular.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	 And beware of the nerves, and let the blood run in the desired quantity.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	 Then carefully release the constriction and place on the site of the fleubotoma a bandage and strengthen the area, for it is easily healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	 About bloodletting and the qualities to use them.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	 Bloodlettings are with horns, or iron, or glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	 And bloodletting is done in two ways: one is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is bloodletting without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	 And this bloodletting that is without scarification is done in two ways: either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	 And in the places where bloodletting is administered with scarification and extraction of blood there are fourteen locations on the body: one of which is called alnocrati, and it is in the last part of the head; and the middle location of two parts of the neck together; and bloodlettings under the chin below the jaw bone; and bloodletting of two little fingers; and bloodletting of the little finger, which is at the end of the hand; and bloodletting of two thumbs, which are in two arms; and bloodletting of two big toes; and bloodletting of two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	 "But if the necessity arises for venesection due to illness or as a routine measure, administer it at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle of the month, and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	 "Those in whom blood is abundant to the point that they require extraction by venesection and find heaviness and coldness in their head; or those who experience fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck; or those who have paleness in their face and forehead, and darkness and dullness in their eyes; or those whose bleeding point for venesection changes; or those whose laughter is increased; or those who taste blood in their mouth, or whose tongue is swollen and they spit blood; or those whose sleep increases, or those who see blood, redness, rashes, and other similar conditions.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	 "And therefore, when any of these conditions are observed, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then venesection should be performed, preferably after two or three hours have passed since dawn.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	 "And the venesection from the neck is useful because when it reduces heaviness in the head and relieves pressure on the eyes; but it is important that this also be an evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	 And this puncture is in the location of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	 And it should not be used on those who have a fever or are suffering from catarrh, because it will cause great harm to them.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	 And therefore it is not advisable to use this on the elderly or on those whose heads are severely afflicted.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	 But if the person who is being treated with it continues to experience forgetfulness, then you should instruct the person applying the cupping glasses to remove their hand slightly from the cupping glass at intervals, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	 But the cupping of alcohol is in the location of phlebotomy of the black vein and the basilic vein; and therefore you will alleviate asthma, and constriction of breath, and splitting of the lung tissue, and coughing, and chest congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	 And it is advisable to remove the alcohol cupping glass slightly, because if it is left in place, it will cause weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	 And the cupping of alhagdahan will benefit from accidental headaches and opthalmia (eye inflammation), and migraine, and photophobia (sensitivity to light), and toothache; and it is in the location of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.  (Note: "alhagdahan" may refer to a specific type of cupping or herbal treatment not well-known today.)
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	 And it is necessary that you command the bloodletter not to press his hand with too much force during scarification, so that he does not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	 And for bloodletting, you should put alcohol on the chin, and in case of gum disease or similar conditions in the mouth, place them in the area designated for phlebotomy of those who are on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	 However, bloodletting performed with both spatulas should be administered with caution, which is done to increase warmth.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	 And bloodletting of the two parts within the eyes should be considered as the phlebotomy of three veins: the basilica, fusca and cephalic, because this attracts the blood from all those more prominent veins in the flesh, and those smaller veins from other larger veins until it reaches the attraction of the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	 And command the bloodletter not to proceed too much in scarification, because the place is bare of flesh, and only nerves and arteries remain there.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	 And it is a bloodletting with which one lets blood over the ankles, and it is considered for hemorrhoids of the anus and for ulcers below them.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	 And it is necessary to command the ventozador that there be a large ventoza, and that it be made of clay, for the affected area requires strong dryness; and delicate ventozas are not effective, so it should be scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	 However, ventozas on the thighs should be made more carefully, as they draw blood from the entire body, and this can aggravate old pains of the kidneys, bladder, womb, and uterus; they can also induce menstruation, which can cause discomfort and faintness. They are used in place of phlebotomy on the two veins near the ankles and wrists, as well as on the two humors.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	 Nevertheless, they weaken the entire body and cause syncope in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	 The treatment for the veins near the wrists is similar to the treatment for the veins of the two thighs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	 And the quality of the positioning of the ventozas is that you should place the ventoza at the beginning of the vein and draw with moderate suction, not prolonging the position of the ventozas, but rather placing them lightly and keeping them constantly in place, so that the humors may come to the area through gradual adaptation.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	 And do not stop repeating this and continuing until you see the area turn red, swell, and the heat of the blood appear.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	 And then scarify and perform suction little by little, and afterward consider the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	 Because a man with delicate and sparse flesh should be scarified only once to prevent the area from becoming ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	 And command the cupping practitioner to widen the scarification and probe a little, then perform the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	 And if the blood is thick, then you should scarify two times, because in the first incision the way for the blood's subtlety and its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	 But in the second one, it is a search for the complete extraction of the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	 And if the blood is very dark, then let the scarification be done a third time to achieve the last (remaining blood).
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	 Finally, when we want to extract a little blood or just a small amount, one incision is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	 And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we should make many incisions; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to make deep incisions.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	 And in the act of scarification, the depth should only be that of a cord (rope).
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	 And if the vein of that person is large, hard, dark, and its pores are tight, it is necessary that the places for the cupping glasses be anointed with gentle, opening, resolving oils; if it is in the summer, such as aloe oil or violet oil, or oil of sweet almonds, or camomile oil; and if it is in winter, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or St. John's wort oil, and similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	 And if the excess is large and fierce, then use oil of amaranth, or balm oil, or aloe oil, or oil of aniseed, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	 But if the person has wide pores and tender skin, it is necessary to refrain from using oil, and it is advisable for this person that before cupping therapy, the areas of the cups be washed with rose water or strong vinegar water, or chamomile water, or borage water, and similar ones.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	 And that person whose blood is of high humidity, wash his wounds with vinegar or with water of myrtle and sumac, similar to those [methods].
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	 And that person whose superfluidities are thick, wash his wounds with old vinegar, or with water of savory (which is marjoram), or a decoction of dill, or chamomile, and similar [substances].
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	 And it is necessary that the wound be covered before bathing; it is also necessary to administer [treatment] immediately after bathing for an hour or two, and it is necessary to sleep near the wound.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	 What should be done before cauterization in a patient who has undergone bloodletting?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	 It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the patient or the person who must be bloodletted is choleric and has hot and inflamed blood, it is necessary for them to take cooling substances, such as tart green apples, endive with vinegar, lettuce, sorrel, syrup of roses, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	 And let their food be thus: with pulses, and the meat of small birds, and foods seasoned with sharp [tastes], and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	 And regarding the one whose illness is acute, it is necessary for them to drink a syrup made of almiva or syrup from hemp seeds, sumac, and fragrant hyssop between vinegar and honey; and it should be advised that they use little drinking and eating, and their food should exclude pollen, cannabis, peppers, small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	 And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and phlebotomy, drinking should be greater than eating.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	 And it is necessary that in certain hours before bloodletting or phlebotomy, some men should be given theriac alpharac or musk medicine, whether it is nutmeg or mace, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is thinned; and they should not take that cold drink.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	 But the bloodletting that is without scarification should be placed on the liver, and over the spleen and gout, and over the navel, in the places of the joints, and the bladder of the ankle, because these members cannot tolerate scarification on them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	 And it is not desired for anything other than drawing blood from a member, just as a cupping glass is placed on the breast in illness of nosebleed; and they use this so that a thick, viscous gas in the member is dissolved, just as a cupping glass is placed on the stomach and navel; because this rarefies the member, cools it, and relieves pain by resolving the gas.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	 Based on the context and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	 And similarly, when it is placed on the liver and spleen to remove the gas trapped within them.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	 And these ventoses are applied with suction alone; some are applied with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	 And sometimes they are applied full of warm water in cases of spleen disease.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	 And this is why the ventose should be filled and made larger; it should contain only hot water or water with appropriate medicinal herbs added to it.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	 Form of ventose administered with fire: let the diameter of the opening be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and let the quantity of air inside be half a palm's length; and let it be placed on the back, in the lumbar region, halfway down the back, with a small hole through which a needle can pass.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	 It should be made of tin or lead, with thick, smooth, and even edges, so that it does not disturb the position of the member on which it is placed.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	 And in the middle of it, there should be a transverse iron or steel rod, where the candle with fire is placed.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	 And this ventose should be much larger than the one we have described earlier, and somewhat smaller depending on the illness and condition of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	 And the leeches for infants and the weak are different from those used for youths and robust people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	 And the method of placing this leech with fire on a limb is to spread the cloth with decent firewood in front of a few beeswax candles, and place it in the middle of the crossbar in the middle of the leech, so that the fire is lit around the edges to prevent the patient's body from being burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	 Then place it on the limb of the patient, and the finger should be on the hole we mentioned earlier, until when we have the leeches and do not need to remove the finger and let the steam escape over that hole, then the leech will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	 And you should ignite the cloth according to its nature, and repeat this process if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	 But in the case of a leech used to treat pleurisy, it is done with water, in which there is neither a crossbar nor a hole, and it is not administered until it is filled with water, and it is placed on the limb alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	 And this is how it looks: This leech, the larger it is, the better, because it can hold a greater quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	 It looks like you've provided only a chapter number ("Capitol .xcvii."), which translates directly to "Chapter XCVII" in English. This simply indicates that what follows is part of Chapter 97 of the text.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	 And the quality of using those bloodsuckers which you have found in the muddy waters of stagnant ponds.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	 And then let them be placed day and night in muddy water until they become sluggish, and that there is no longer any cause left in their bellies; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping glasses; and then rub the patient's limbs until they redden; and then place them on the patient.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	 And when they are full and have completed their task.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	 And if possible, suck out the affected area with a cupping glass, it is more effective in helping.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	 And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and warm water; and then rub it and press it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	 And if the patient's body continues to bleed near where the leeches were applied and this is what follows, then you should dip a linen cloth in cold water and place it over the area until the bleeding stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	 And if the blood is profuse, then sprinkle vitriol powder or other hemostatic substances over it until the bleeding stops; or place cooked broad beans on the area and leave them there until the beans stick to the area and the bleeding stops.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	 And it is necessary, if required, the use of blood-sucking leeches when it is possible to apply them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	 And if the use of leeches is forbidden due to their suspension, then the area should be rubbed with fresh blood or a needle should be placed in the area until blood comes out; and immediately they should be applied, because when they sense any blood they will attach very quickly.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	 And when you want them to detach, sprinkle a little powdered aloe, salt, or ash on them, and they will fall off immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	 Thus begins the chapter of the third part: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	 This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine, and it concerns the restoration of broken bones and dislocations that have occurred in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	 Oh, son, know that ignorant doctors and common people boast about this chapter, those who at any time have not respected the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	 And because of this, the method of the learned in our land is neglected; and I have not forgotten this at any time for anything; and I have not added anything to it except through the length of study of the books of the Ancients and reflection on their understanding until I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	 And then I directed my efforts towards study and experimentation throughout my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	 And I have already described in this chapter everything that my knowledge contains and on which my experiments have passed; now I have shortened it for you others and relieved you of the burden of length; I have shortened it to the end of brevity, and shown it to the end of explanation, and formed many forms of the instruments used in it, as is done by addition of explanation, just as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	 Chapter one.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	 Summary and compilation of the causes of bone fractures, of which the knowledge is necessary before we begin to recall the members broken and diverse in each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	 Therefore, let us say in the preamble of this chapter the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters to which at the beginning the craftsmen are compelled and stand firm on the truth of those; it is you and others who are prompt that know or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	 And so I say that when any fracture, dislocation, twisting, or fall occurs, it is necessary for you to begin with bloodletting or cupping that person, or both at the same time, unless some cause prevents it, such as weakness of virtue, or if it happens to a child, an old person in decay, or during very hot weather, or very cold weather.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	 And then let the patient be content with a diet of fresh herbs and small birds or crabs; we prohibit large meats and overeating, as well as all foods that clog the veins with blood, until you are certain that the abscess has been cauterized, and if not, fear the flow of matter to the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	 And then return the patient to their original diet with which they are accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	 And thus when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods which are heavy and difficult to digest, such as foods made from cooked wheat with water, rice, cabbage, turnips, beef stomachs, calves' feet, pork fat, and other similar things; and with this regimen a fracture becomes consolidated more gently and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	 And know that bones broken in the very old and the elderly cannot be continued and healed according to their nature due to the dryness of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	 And they are always continued and healed according to their nature due to the dryness of those members, and those that are at the end of adolescence are also continued and healed, such as the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	 Certainly! Here is the translation of your text:
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And for this reason it is necessary to pause the patient's food, food that contains heaviness, stickiness, and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	 Diversity of fractures according to the diversity of the member (limb).
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	 And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the hand bone; and similarly, all the other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	 And I will come with a description of every type of fracture, explained in its own chapter separately from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	 About the diversity of fractures within themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	 And the types of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is made an arched fracture, and one that happens in stars; and sometimes it is made according to the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the patella and little bones and additions, whether they occur or not, as is done with a pen when preparing to write. It is also a fracture with a bruise and disruption at the end, and it is a small cracking fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	 And in every way, it is a skill or torment for the patient's restoration according to what will come to mind later, distinctly in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	 A sudden sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	 And by this it is recognized as a bone fracture: it is the distortion of it, and the protrusion and appearance of it when touched, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	 Therefore, when there is no apparent distortion in the place and no sound is produced by your touch, but rather when you shake the bone with your hand and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	 It is possible that it is just a distortion or small fracture, so you should not move it with your hand and with total compression; rather, place on it the medicines of which there is memory at this moment that are suitable for the place; and then it should be tightly bound for subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	 And know that when the place is arched and not cut in two or anything else happens to it, as long as all parts of its shape are lifted up, then you should begin from your hour to straighten it, having that an abscess comes to it carefully.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	 And if the patient develops an abscess, leave it alone for several days until the abscess subsides; then cleanse it according to any method you can of lightness and skill.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	 And know that the restoration and cleansing of the patient is easier than that of the bone in which the injury occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	 Then strengthen him according to how his recovery progresses.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	 But if the bone is broken, then it is necessary to extend this fractured limb in two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or with one rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	 And let your position be such that you place the limbs in their natural form while the parts of the broken bone are extended, so it is necessary for you to make them return to their places with skill and according to any method you can.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	 And take care according to your strength that nothing happens to the patient due to your operation, nor any injury; and it is necessary for you to apply one bone with its companion in their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	 And it is fitting that at that time you should touch the area with your hand, and if you see any different cause, correct it and cleanse it according to your ability.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	 And the quality of the constriction in a limb is what I describe to you, so that you know that broken limbs are varied in their smallness and largeness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	 And for the small ones such as the arm and the finger and the thigh, similar to those, it is necessary that the wrapping be of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	 But for the large ones such as the hip or the thigh, it is necessary that on those there be a hard wrapping, because the hard wrapping tightly binds the large limb and strengthens it from all parts with an equal constriction, so that in it no lesion enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	 And then you begin, at the time of your evacuation from equilibrium, to place convenient ligaments on that, over the site of the fracture with three or four wrappings as the limb requires; and strengthen your hand a little with the ligaments.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	 And then you come to that at the highest part of the site of the fracture, and strengthen more than you did not break your constriction with which you have strengthened the site of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	 And then you lengthen yourself with the wrapping of the site of the fracture a little, and soften the constriction little by little, until you take from the site its great partition.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	 Based on the given text, here's a line-by-line translation of the new source sentence:
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	 And then place between the folds of a stop or leather strip that has been soaked in the tortuous nature of the fracture, if there is any; and if not, do not place anything on it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	 And then place another bandage on it, and immediately soak these well-made steel strips, if there is no swelling or pustule in the area, and then place on it whatever removes that pustule and the swelling; leave it for several days; then strengthen the steel bands on it.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	 And let the steel bands be of the thickness of a cane reed, and be well-formed; or they may be of pine wood; or of palm ribs; and let their width be according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	 However, the steel band that is placed on that fracture should be a little thicker and wider than the other bands, and the length of the band according to the size of the limb, whether large or small; and then strengthen over the bands with another bandage according to your first method; and then tie it up above with a decent tie as we have said about the binding, and that is, let your tie be according to the place of the fracture more, and the farther it is from the fracture, the less tight.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	 "And thin needles are not suitable, because with them you will not achieve what you want due to constriction, and it is not appropriate for there to be more than one finger's width between them.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	 "And if the patient is irritated by the tips of the needles near the constriction sites, then place a piece of wool or a soft cloth underneath until it no longer causes injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	 "Sometimes the break is with a wound, and there is a disruption in the cord; I will come back to that topic in the following chapter.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	 "And know that never is any broken limb strictly handled with needles on the first day; because if the limb is large, it is not fitting to place needles upon it except after approximately five or seven days, according to your certainty of avoiding an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	 "And this is the method of plasters with which the ancients restored [health], which were placed upon fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	 "Method of plaster as a brief summary for the restoration of fractures, suitable for many complex cases and especially for women and children, because it does not cause heat or cold: and that is to take powder from the mill, and it is the marrow of the flour which you must collect from the movement of the mill on the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	 And prepare him thus as he is, except that you bind his eyes with an egg white cloth, and do not make the bandage too thick or thin; then use this.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	 And another way to make a plaster that heals fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take asafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and migrach (which is the root of wild balm), each one dracma x; myrrh and aloe, each one dracma v; and aloe, dracma xx. Let them all be finely ground and sifted, and mix them with either aloe water or egg white if the patient's complexion is dry; then use this plaster, for it has a good composition and heals broken bones gently, and it helps many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	 Another way to make a plaster for fractures and sprains: take migrach (wild celery root) and mugwort, each one dracma x; myrrh and aloe, each one dracma v; acacia, dracma vi; Armenian bole, dracma .xx.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	 Let them all be ground finely in a mortar with vinegar, and sifted, then made into a paste with water or egg white, and applied.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	 This text appears to describe a method for treating dislocated joints and bones, as well as the pain and swelling associated with these conditions. Let's translate it line by line:
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	 In this ointment there is no virtue of restoration or pus removal, and it specifically expels pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	 Another method of ointment for restoration of fractures: take leaves of wild fig tree and wild poppy; crush everything together and make an ointment from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	 Method of brief ointment administration for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of the remaining pus: take root of mallow, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, and pea flour; divide everything equally and crush them all together, then apply with wine if the limb is not scraped.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	 But if it is scraped, then mix it with water or vinegar and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	 Another method of ointment stronger in resolution than the previous one, when hard pus occurs for the restoration of the limb: take roots of mallow, linseed, and mullein, and melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, all equally divided; crush everything together and mix with water from willow or soft water or wine, whichever is suitable for the quality of the limb and its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	 Based on the pattern you've provided and my understanding of medieval medical texts, here's a line-by-line translation:
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	 Sure, let's translate this line by line:
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	 It appears that the text deals with medical instructions or guidelines for treating specific ailments, particularly joint pain and related issues. Let's translate the given sentence line by line:
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	 And if there is a sudden or intense pain, swelling, or inflammation at the site, then you should immediately cut or lance it to relieve pressure and remove any dressing that was applied.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	 And take a clean cloth and a marine sponge soaked in warm water, and with it wash the area until the swelling subsides and the pain is relieved; then let the member rest for an hour; and then place on it wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rosemary oil, and bind it overnight to ensure that the abscess does not burst, and that the inflammation of the member subsides, and the pain is reduced.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then you should repeat the application of a fine and small bandage and do not tighten it as strongly as before, and continue with that until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	 And if you see that the abscess, redness, pain, and inflammation, along with all the other symptoms, have completely subsided, and there is no longer a need for bandages or bindings, then you should continue in the same manner as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	 And if the member does not experience any of the causes mentioned earlier, then do not lance it until after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes this is left for twenty days depending on how the member appears after being lanced, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and the flesh coagulates over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	 And then adjust the stricture more than you did in the first stricture, and adjust according to the thickness of the patient's food, as his memory is restored.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	 But if you see the place of the fracture already dry and more withered than it should be, then know that the nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, soak it in warm water at all times until you remove it; and this should be done for three whole days; and lighten the stricture a little, and through this operation the nutrition will flow to the member, and it will heal slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	 But what the foolish restorers of the fractured member do when they restore it later than at the beginning, as is proper, and it is restored according to its crookedness, this is an error according to their operation, and a great danger; and if this were done correctly, the ancients would have written about this in their books, and they would have worked with it.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	 And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable that you should not do it either.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	 Chapter Two: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	 There are many types of fractures, and their shapes are varied, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are made by the blow of an axe, and the blow breaks all the bone into the cavity, which is beneath the bone, just as it happens in a log, and because of this, this type is called ascial; or the axe cuts off some part of the bone, and cuts the flesh of it but does not cut through to the other side; and this type of fracture is called levatio absoluta.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	 And the wound of these two fractures is either great or small, and the fracture that is crushed or bruised; and the cause of it is striking with a hammer or falling on a stone, and likewise.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	 And this fracture is either penetrating, approaching the skin near the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the wound of these two fractures is either great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	 And it is a fracture that is fine within the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason this type of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	 And it is a fracture that is made either by falling or by the strike of a stone, and similarly, which makes some layer of the bone enter into the divided parts within, and it is made in the concave place, as happens to the earthenware pots when they are struck and are broken from their entrance into the divided parts within.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	 And this is mainly found in the bones of children, as well as in the heads of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	 And for all these species of fractures that are splinters, they are painful like separated stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	 And I will come with a reminder of all this to its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	 And we recognize all these types of fractures through detection on them and by examination with tests and the removal of decaying flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	 And the capillary type is recognized because it appears on the bone, it is washed and then examined with a probe, for the fracture looks black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	 But in the treatment of fractures, consider first the symptoms of the patient, and if you see through the symptoms an evident sign of fear, such as vomiting from anger, fainting, loss of consciousness, loss of voice, syncope, acute fever, discharge from the eyes and redness of them, similar to these symptoms in major constitutions, without doubt he will not be cured.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	 And if you see non-serious symptoms, you hope for recovery, then you begin the treatment of him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	 Which means that if it has come to you in the beginning as a wound and this is in the days of winter, then you should study the removal of the bone before day fourteen according to every constitution.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	 And if it is in the days of summer, then you should hasten to remove the bone before day seven, having that what is under the bone be corrupt from flesh, and that the symptoms we have mentioned occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	 And if the fracture has reached the layer of fat covering the brain, and it is with small splinters and dust, then you must carefully incise the split and dusty part, as I will advise you to do.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	 And it is necessary that you shave the head of the afflicted person, and uncover the bone according to custom and manner as best as you can based on the shape of the wound, and do so gently upon the afflicted person.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	 And if you notice the detection of the bone, or an effusion of blood or pus, then you must prepare for it with whatever is necessary. This means filling the area with cloths soaked in wine and oil, allowing the wound to rest until the pus subsides and the bleeding stops; then begin with the cutting around the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	 And this can be done according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And one method is that you incise the bone with a narrow scalpel like this, and this is its shape: And then administer another scalpel, somewhat wider than the first; and this is its shape.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	 And then administer an even wider scalpel than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	 And use of them with ease in striking on the incisions, so that the head does not hit and hurt that person.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	 And if the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary to bore a hole around it before you administer the incisions with the drills, which are called non-penetrating drills.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	 And they are not named this way only because those do not reach the end of the bone where it is thickest, but also because the drill has a round extremity or edge on which there is a small sharp margin resembling a small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone. ︎
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	 And it is appropriate that you take of these drills a large number that each one is suitable for the thickness of each bone, until you have all the bones of the skull with the extremity being sharp, and the quantity in length and width should be according to the quantity of thickness of those bones.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	 And this is the method of three species of drills: The method of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the drill on the bone and revolve it with your said words until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then change the drill to another place, and place it so that everything passes through the quantity of the thickness of the ray or its surroundings.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	 Here's the translation of the given text:
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	 And it is important that you ensure with all caution that the surgeon does not touch any cause of the scabies.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	 And therefore when you have drilled through the bone and if the scabies is continuous with it, and you have extracted that, it is necessary to scrape and shave it on its roughness of what is in the bone with another instrument similar to a knife, but nevertheless it must be thinner and more delicate than other knives.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	 And if any small and splintered parts of the bones remain, then take those easily with what you have of the instruments; and then cure the wound with lint and ointments as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And the other manner of operation is gentle and far from fear, which they call Galenic and praise greatly; and this is his saying: it is necessary for you at the beginning to begin uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most intense and apparent, until when you have uncovered that part and placed underneath it the tip of this slow and gentle knife, of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	 And the lenticular part is round and does not cut any cause, and the pointed part extends from it two finger-widths in length, as you see; so that the lenticular part may be adapted to the scabies with its cutting face into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	 And then strike the small incision with a little hammer until all the bone is exposed with ease as it turns, and make sure that the fat layer does not suffer any accident that you fear in any way. If the doctor is the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	 If there is any adhesion of the fat to the bone in some parts of the bone, incise that with the pointed end of the knife, and separate it from the bone easily, for it can be separated without harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	 And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the fat, and what is separated or removed from the bone is its surface, and roughness and subtle splinters remain on it, then you must scrape away that roughness and eradicate those splinters with fine razors, which you have prepared in various quantities so that you may use them in the most convenient places and in the right way according to where your operation takes place on that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	 And you must administer in your razor the one with which you initially scrape the bone, and then use the next one, which is finer, until you reach the point where you can use the finest and most subtle of all those razors.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	 "But in any of the other small capillary fractures or subtle fractures, it is necessary to administer care according to what you have learned for their correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	 "And it is because not all those who have studied this art are skilled in it.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	 "It has been written about and shown in the case of large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	 "And if the skin is cut when you remove the bone, then take cloth according to the size of the wound and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the opening of the wound; and then take another folded or tripled cloth and soak it in wine and rose oil and place it on top of the first cloth, and do this as lightly as possible so that you do not press too hard; and then administer a bandage with lard, and do not tighten it more than is necessary for the wound alone.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	 "And leave it with this care for one day or two until you are sure that the abscess is cauterized; and then unbind it and administer medicines which have a superfluous dryness, such as linseed oil and powdered iris root, and poppy seeds and similar things.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	 And it is that you make a powder from these medications, which should be sprinkled on the wound as they are dry; and generally, administer all medicine of such a nature that it cleanses and does not cause pain.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	 And be careful according to your skill that the wound in your care is clean; and do not allow it to have any scab or other; nor let it accumulate pus in it; for when it is confined beneath the skin, it corrupts it and poisons it, and causes in the patient a malignant disease.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	 And it happens in the vault of the skull, when the bone is exposed and especially if its care has been neglected, and it turns black on its surface; and therefore consider whether these accidents happen to the patient, for you should know that it is very harmful without any doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 And if there is no blackness except from the medication that has been applied on it, and it is due to that medication that this blackness occurs, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of olive oil, and with these moisten a cloth, and then place it on the vault; and then care for it with the necessary curative herbs until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	 Chapter III
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	 Of the restoration of the nose when it is crushed.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	 Know that the nose is not broken but rather divided into two parts at once, the upper and lower, or one of these parts may be displaced, because there are two bones in it, and the lower part is cartilaginous and cannot be broken; only contusion, distortion, and curvature occur.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	 But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert your little finger into the nose and close the fracture from inside with your index finger, and with your thumb from outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	 And you should do this gently, being careful not to cause pain to the patient during your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	 And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then it must be equalized with the tip of a reed that has a small thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	 And if the fracture is in both parts, then you should do the same thing.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	 And take care to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then you should wait for the abscess to heal after seven or ten days.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	 And then insert a piece of linen cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one place, or put two pieces, if the fracture is in two places, and let it be thick enough to fill the hole in the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	 And so say some of the ancient restorers that the pieces should be wrapped in fat and changed daily, but I have not seen this. It is necessary for the piece to be wrapped in egg white mixed with powdered bone; and then leave the piece inside until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	 And sometimes it is inserted into the nose instead of a piece, namely a wooden peg that is wrapped in linen cloth; and let this be done when the nasal fracture is very severe and the patient is not prevented from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	 And this method is not necessary for you; if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use pieces.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	 And if another time a carbuncle occurs, place a plaster on the nose with wax or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	 But if a carbuncle does not occur, then it is necessary to plaster the outside with sumac flour and powdered anise mixed with egg white; and then place a linen bandage over it, and do not touch the nose with anything else.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	 Here's the translation of your given sentence:
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	 And if a wound occurs inside the nose, then it is necessary to cure that with clips and administer lead cannulas until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	 Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	 The restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	 When the jaw has been broken and the fracture is not with a wound, consider if the fracture is only on the outside and not broken in two, and it curves at the inner parts, then its diagnosis is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	 Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and likewise, if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert the index finger of your right hand; and with it, press the swelling of the fracture inside to the outside parts, with your other hand on the outer part of the bone; with that, reduce it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	 And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer traction of the two parts in line with each other until their approximation becomes possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	 And if there is a loosening of the teeth to the point of disruption, then strengthen them with gold or silver wire or silk thread; and place wax over the broken jaw, and place a double cloth over it, and place a well-made large starched cloth over that, or a sole of leather equal in length to the jaw; and secure it above according to how you are skilled in bandaging and apply it conveniently, so that it is not disrupted.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	 And order the patient to rest and remain calm, and give them light and simple food.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	 And if you think that the shape has already been altered in any way, then remove it on the third day; and afterward rectify what has been altered and apply a plaster made of powdered bran, egg white, or samolina flour, after removing the cerot from him, and place clean wool over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	 And when this plaster is attached and adjusted to him, and the bone's position has not been altered, leave it in place until he is healed and the fracture strengthens; for many times this fracture is healed within three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	 And if an abscess occurs again, then administer what has been said many times for his treatment until he is healed and the abscess is removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	 And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider if it is a piece of bone that has become separated or splinters; then you should be careful to remove those splinters using what is appropriate for removing such fragments from instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should widen it using a fleam according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	 When you have removed those splinters, and nothing remains of them, then sew up the orifice of the wound if it is large; otherwise, place one of the suitable plasters on it that will help heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	 Chapter 5
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	 On restoring the collarbone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	 Often the collarbone is broken from its front side due to a muscle and this break can occur in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	 Because it is either broken, separated, or broken into two parts without splinters; and the restoration of it is easy; or it happens that there are splinters in it, and its restoration is difficult; or it happens that the break is with a wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	 And the operation in that case, when the fracture is without a wound, is to have two assistants present, so that one holds and follows the broken collarbone, and the other extends the neck towards that side.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	 And then gently close the fracture with your fingers until it is formed correctly according to its shape and there are no prominent parts or concavities.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	 And if you need more extension, then place a pad of cloth or wool under the patient's heel, and its size should be according to your necessity; then extend and raise the ankle and press the pad with your hand until it aligns the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	 And if you cannot pull the extremity of the ankle to its original position because it has turned inward, then the patient should be placed supine on their back, and place a cushion of medium size over their calf muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	 And the assistant should press the patient's calf muscle back into its original position until the bone of the ankle is raised and comes out of the inverted position; then you straighten the fracture and align it with your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	 But if you feel bone splinters from the ankle and they are prominent, then it is necessary to make an incision over that area and remove those splinters easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if it is stuck in the bone, then make an incision with one of the scalpels that you have prepared for this purpose, after placing under the ankle the instrument that serves as a splint; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and this is its shape:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	 And it is similar to a cup, whose this is the hollow part; and its size should be according to what you need from it, depending on the bigness of the bone or the smallness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	 "But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; so that there are two ends, one wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	 "And if the wound that you have cut when you have extracted the arrow from the bone is wide, and you are certain of pus, then you should bring the two lips of the wound together with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	 "And if the wound is small, or you fear certain pus, then fill the wound with cloth and powder according to the extent of the wound's opening.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	 "And if certain pus occurs, then infuse a cloth with vinegar and rose oil and wine, and place it on that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	 "But the narrowing of the bone when there is no wound and no cut, it is that you place a paste made from flour of wheat and egg white on it, and place a stopper on it, and then place the blade under the tongue of the patient, if he needs it, and then take a humeral bandage, which is what they call mot long in Arabic, and let its length be one palm or around that; and then place double layers of powder over the stopper and the paste; and then take a thin board about three handbreadths long and of similar length; and then wrap that board in cloth, and then wrap that cloth with the board on the fracture site; and then place humeral bandages as it is wrapped, and wrap it around the neck of the patient and under his tongue and behind his back, and reduce it over the entire area, and whenever the narrowing of the fracture with narrowing descends, and this is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	 And thus, make sure that the bandage is not too tight over the broken bone; and for this reason, it is necessary for you to see the patient every day. When the bandage becomes softened or you notice that the bone has moved, then you should adjust it and strengthen the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	 And then place the patient's head on their chest, and put a small pillow under their neck at night; so that with this, the helper's aid to the side of the patient is elevated, and thus the fracture of the furcula (wishbone) is raised by the muscle's elevation; or tie the patient's arm to their chest.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	 And do not untie the bandage unless swelling or pus appears in the place, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	 And then renew the poultice if you see that the face of it is towards this, and adjust it in the narrow part and restore it, and leave it until the fracture of the furcula is restored and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	 And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the moon in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	 Chapter .VI
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	 Of the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	 Here's my translation of the sentence:
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	 Sure, I'd be happy to help translate that sentence into English:
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	 This is quite challenging, but I'll give it my best shot! The text appears to be discussing some sort of medical treatment involving the application of various materials or items on a specific location (likely the affected area). Here's a line-by-line translation:
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	 Here's the translation of your new sentence:
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	 "Then strengthen it above with a bandage tightly wound and securely fastened, so that it is not displaced from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	 This line seems to be discussing the treatment or observation of bandages on a patient:
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	 "And you apply pressure on the patient's wound.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	 "And the spatula is restored in 10 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	 "And therefore when this period is complete, then you remove the bandage, and know for certain that it is one of the bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	 "And if you proceed from the bone itself, press and place a string under it, then cut above it, remove it, and act as we have said regarding the break of the clavicle with caution if this occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	 "Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	 "On the healing of a foot fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	 "The foot sometimes breaks in the middle and it heals late; but the ends of it move too much and are shattered and crushed.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	 "And the consequences of this are that when it breaks in the middle, it inclines towards the inner parts and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, fever, and vomiting blood; and the cavity in the broken bone is evident to touch.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	 "And its healing is that the patient be placed supine on their back, and a cushion be placed between their shoulders; then press the muscles of the patient, and adjust the ribs of the patient with the hands of two assistants, and be skillful in the operation of it and in the position according to every manner that is possible and that is suitable for it, until the shape of the bone returns as needed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	 Here's my attempt at translating the text line by line:
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	 And if the necessity provokes the removal of that corruption or pustule, or pain, or abscess that occurs in that place, then you cut and undo that (area) and eradicate the plaster and correct what has occurred with the manner of healing it; and then return the plaster, if needed to the face; and adjust the stricture until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	 Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	 Of the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	 Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in large areas near the spine; and at their ends, toward the front, such an accident does not happen to them except because they are made of cartilage.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	 And the knowledge of it is not hidden from feeling, but the investigation of it should be done with the hands.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	 And the restoration should be done by placing the hand on the fracture according to what is possible until it is well positioned, and then bandage and strengthen the broken bone with iron, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	 And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the internal parts, then a very strong pain and puncture occurs in the patient, just like a puncture that happens to someone with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the peritoneum; and difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting of much blood occur; and this is difficult to cure. ︎
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	 And already the Ancients were ingenious in this with many ingenious methods.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	 And among them is this: it is necessary to place food in front of the patient that produces inflation and gas, so that the stomach is inflated and expanded, and the fracture is pushed towards the outer parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	 Here's the translation of your given sentence:
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	 And some of them say that it should be placed on the abdomen and then sucked strongly; this seems reasonable, but there is fear that the abdominal suction will draw the excess to the area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	 And some of them say: it is necessary that the area be covered with wool already soaked in hot oil, and pillows should be placed between the ribs until it is filled; let the bandage be equal to when you wrap around according to roundness; and then treat the patient with a poultice of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	 And if the intense pain that the patient experiences is unbearable and the bone punctures through the skin with its tip, then fear for the patient; in this case, it is necessary to cut open the area, expose the broken rib, and then place over it an instrument that maintains traction. The use of which was mentioned earlier, and easily split the bone, and remove it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	 Then we should approximate the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with sutures, and treat it with dressings until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	 And if an abscess forms inside, then you should heat and soak pillows in oil and place them on the area; and treat the patient with water that is suitable for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	 And he should be laid on his back on the bed in which he sleeps, until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	 Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	 On the restoration of a fracture of the spine of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	 Sometimes there is a fracture in the bones of the neck, but it tends to heal on its own, as do the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	 And when this happens to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider: if you see their limbs softened and numb, without the ability to move or extend them, and when you press those limbs with your fingers or prick them with a needle and there is no sensation of pain, then know that it is not healing, and such conditions are fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	 And if they move and feel constriction with their fingers and needle pricks, then know that the bone is saved and that the patient will heal with care.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	 And if you see the vertebrae of the neck in a similar condition and want to know if they will heal or not, then consider his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	 Then if you see that they are softened, the same thing has happened to them as with the limbs, and furthermore when he lies on his back, there is a lack of breath and defecation without his will, and sometimes he is laid on his back and wants to urinate but cannot. Then know that it is fatal, and in such cases do not bother with his care.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	 "But if none of those causes occur, the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	 "And the treatment for this is that you pierce the abscess carefully with a heated needle or a lancet; place over it some warm oil, alone, or mixed with some honey. Place this over the affected area several times a day until the abscess is drained.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	 "Then place a comforting and soothing plaster on it, and secure it with a bandage; and instruct the patient to rest and be calm, and not to sleep on the painful side until healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	 "And if there is an exudation of pus or any other cause that has already been separated from it, then it is necessary to dry the area and remove that bone; and then bring together the two lips of the wound, with stitches if it is large; and then treat it with some ointment until healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	 "But if the end of the bone is broken and it is the end of the shaft, then you should insert the index finger of your left hand into the rectum, and straighten the broken bone with your other hand as best as you can; then place over it a plaster and bandage, if necessary, and secure it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	 And if you feel that there are broken bones in the patient, then perform a surgical procedure on them, remove those bones, and treat the wound with the prescribed treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	 Capítulo 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	 Sobre la restauración de la hinchazón.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	 Los huesos de las caderas suelen estar rotos, y si están rotos, la fractura de ellos no es más que una división en los extremos de esos huesos, y son incisivos en longitud y se inclinan hacia el interior; y ocurre dolor al paciente en ese lugar y punción, y la pierna está adormecida cuando hay fractura.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	 La restauración de él es que extiendas tu mano sobre el área hasta que esté en contacto con la fractura, que se parece a una figura de él.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	 Y si la fractura está solo en el extremo de él, entonces alinea esa parte según lo que te parezca más apropiado, con una alineación hasta que se asemeje a su forma natural.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	 Pero si la fractura está en el hueso largo que ya se ha desviado hacia adentro, entonces haz que el paciente se acueste boca arriba para que esté listo para que tú realices la restauración de esa fractura.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	 And thus, when you have thoroughly cleaned that area, place an emplaster on it. Then, place a piece of wood or bone on top of the emplaster, and bind it tightly so that you do not need to worry about puncturing the fracture or dislodging the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	 And clean the cavity with water until it absorbs the mixture and applies the bandage evenly. Instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	 However, if you detect an abscess, then cease from extending it and restoring it until the abscess has subsided. Place water on it to cool it down as previously mentioned; then return to restoring it and bind it in the appropriate manner.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	 And if this occurs with the shinbone or if they are fractured, then you should splint them.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter XI
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	 On the restoration of a fracture of the elbow.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	 The elbow is that which is between the arm and the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	 And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is done in one of two ways. One way is for you to take a flat piece of wood, half an inch thick, in this shape:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	 It seems like this text is about medical procedures or prescriptions from the medieval period. Let's break down the sentence you provided and translate it line by line into English:
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	 And follow the patient onto a bench; then immediately throw his broken arm over the post until it reaches the point where the curve of the post is at its midpoint.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	 And immediately suspend the patient by any means possible, or if the attendant extends him to the sides; then the doctor should place his hands on the fracture at the same time, until the fracture is restored to its proper position.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	 Another method is to have the patient lie supine on his back, and suspend his hand from his neck with a ligament; then command two attendants: one should hold what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other should hold the lower part of it; and each should extend it towards their respective sides.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	 And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture with a ligament and over it with another ligament, and each of the two attendants should extend towards their respective sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	 And therefore if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it is necessary that half of the ligament be placed on the little finger, and the other half below the fracture towards the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	 Similarly, if the fracture is close to the elbow, then it is necessary that the ligament be placed on that spot and on that elbow.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	 Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	 Sure, let's translate that sentence line by line:
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	 And place a cloth and strengthen on the assistants' arms to support the patient's arm, unless there is any reason for a broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	 Then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	 And place on the fracture that splint which is the broadest and strongest of all the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on both ends.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	 And then strengthen the splints with the bandage mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	 And let your bandage on the site of the fracture be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	 And the longer the fracture, the narrower should be the bandage.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	 And thus, if you see that the position of the splints and the bandage are as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if you fear an abscess is forming, then leave the bandage and splints in place for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	 And then consider the swelling in all parts for three days to prevent a bruise or swelling from occurring; or it is prohibited that food should reach the limb due to the superfluous tightness of the bandage, and so correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	 If you are confident that nothing will go wrong with this condition, then do not release the bandage until at least three days have passed.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	 And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	 And place a full linen pillow over the helper's chest, and always make sure throughout the night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not displaced or dissolved, or that the bandage becomes softened; therefore, rectify this with all your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	 And feed the patient according to the order we mentioned before, so that at first the food is thin until it starts to strengthen; then it is necessary to make the food thicker for them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	 Because it is customary for the helper and the leg to be strengthened within 40 days; therefore, they should be released and a bath should be administered, and they should be treated with ointments that can correct this condition.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	 And if the break is very recent, then you should not remove from it the bandage and splints before one day or two months.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	 On the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	 And if only the large fireplace is broken and the small one is also broken at the same time, it means that both are cracked.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	 And when the small fireplace is broken on top, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is even easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	 And when the fireplace of him breaks below the fracture, it is serious, and his healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	 And worse than that is when two bones are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	 Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small fireplace on top, then it is appropriate for the doctor to apply a small extension with ease until it is healed.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	 But if the large fireplace is what is broken, then it is necessary to apply a more vigorous extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	 And if both fireplaces are broken at the same time, then it is necessary for you to apply a stronger extension.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	 And it is necessary for you to make the shape of your hand for its restoration, and extend the extension over a cushion, with the palm of your hand on the separated parts above, more than all the other fingers, and let the auricular finger be lower than the others, and let the patient sit on a low chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	 And place a cushion in front of him on the bed or bench, so that the patient does not slip downwards.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	 And then have one minister extend his arm from below with his hand or a bandage, and another minister do the same above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	 Then the doctor should envelop the bone until it is reduced to its best form possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	 And if there are fragments in the fracture, then use your skill to reduce all of them to their place.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	 And if there appears to be a fragment separated that touches the spine and it is not within your hope for its restoration, then make an incision over it and remove it according to the manner we mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	 But if the fracture is with a wound, I have made a special chapter about that, so take care of it in the way described there.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	 And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then line a cloth with a poultice made of rose oil and white beeswax, which should be midway between thinness and thickness, and place a strong cloth over it with gentle pressure until the abscess has subsided; then remove the poultice and apply a plaster prepared from powdered bran with egg whites, and then place irons [on top]; and let the iron placed on that fracture be wider and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	 And know that the number of stars on the arm indicates in major conditions, whether it is a break in one finger or two fingers at once.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	 And then press strongly and firmly on the location of the break, and when the pressure extends to the parts above or below the break, moisten the stricture a little more according to how it was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and damp, not hard or rough; the thread with which it is tightened should be of medium thickness, neither too fine nor too coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	 And examine the limb and the ligament after some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	 And if any swelling occurs which requires correction, as soon as the swelling appears on the limb, then it is necessary to immerse the limb in hot water until the swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	 And let the member rest unconstrained until it heals, and then reapply the bandage.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	 And if the bandage has already softened and the bone has healed and appears such, then straighten everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	 And consider whether the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to an excess of stricture, because then it is necessary to soften that area a little and leave it alone for some days until the nourishment reaches that part, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	 But if the patient does not experience any of the causes mentioned above, then it is not necessary to release him for about 20 days or around that time period.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	 And the patient's hand should be suspended due to its power of agitated movements, and make them sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	 And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or it is slightly restored in 28 days, and all this depends on the complexity of the condition and the strength of the constitution.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter XIII
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	 On the restoration of a broken finger of the hand.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	 Know that in the fingers of the hand and in the toes of the feet, fractures rarely occur, and they are not experienced except for bruises.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	 And when the hand experiences a fracture or bruise, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back and in front of them place hundredweights according to balance, and then place the hand of the patient on that which is extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	 Sure, let's break down and translate this line by line:
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	 Here's the translation of the given text:
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	 If the grip is on the inner parts, you should vent the palm of the hand, and then make it look like a fabric sphere, and tell the patient to grasp it with their gripped hand; immediately wrap it tightly with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	 And the stone should be placed on the back of the hand with cloth in which it is wrapped, so that the stone is applied to the palm; grasp this as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	 But if the break is on the outer parts, then place a stone on top and another stone from the broken part underneath in the palm, so that the hand remains open and straight; and immediately bind the fracture, tying it with cloth between the stones as mentioned.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	 And if there is a break in any of the phalanges of the fingers, then if it is the fingertip, wrap it as needed and immediately bind it with the palm, and if you wish, place a small stone on top to raise the fracture and prevent displacement.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	 But if the break is in other fingers, such as the middle finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then wrap and bind it together with its neighboring finger, or bind all of them continuously, which is better; or place a small stone on top, as we have said for the fingertip.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	 And consider, in your treatment and especially then, the condition of abscess caution and opposition — with your operation — with what is necessary when some cause occurs from those, according to the repeated account of it.
Capitol .xiv.	 Chapter XIV
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	 Of the treatment for a fracture in the bone of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	 The bone of the hip is often broken and is felt as it separates into parts, both in front and above.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	 And the treatment of it is done in such a way that one bandage is strengthened over the fracture and another bandage under the fracture, and the patient should be placed on their stomach and face down.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	 And then the assistant should extend all of the bandage to its full length according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	 But if the fracture is near the hip joint, then let the bandage be close to the groin in the thigh area, so that the extension reaches there, and the other bandage under the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	 Similarly, if the break is near the knee, then let the bandage be made close to the knee, and the extension should be towards the lower parts. ‌
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	 And then the doctor should use both hands to guide the bone back into its correct position according to nature's likeness and rejoin it with a good union; in this case, one must apply plaster and bandage, otherwise, an abscess may occur on the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	 But if an abscess does occur in him, then you should leave it for some days until the abscess has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	 The bandage for him should be made in this way: it is necessary to wrap a hard bandage around the fracture and fold it two or three times, removing excess material; then wrap the leg until it reaches the ankle and the base of the knee.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	 Then insert a long needle between the thigh and the leg close to the wound on both sides, ensuring that the ends of the needle protrude from the higher part of the two sides; then turn what is left of the bandage around the leg and the thigh.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	 Then place on the thigh in the location of that fracture thorns, and from those place one thorn on the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	 And then fill the empty spaces between the thigh and the hip with soft cloths, so that the constriction may be clotted.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	 And then begin with a strong binding in the middle of the fracture site with three or four wraps, and the more you move away from the fracture site, the looser and moister your binding should be.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	 And then extend the two ends of the cord to the broken parts until they reach the ankle bone of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the splints on the other side so that the binding is not dislodged from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	 And then loosen the binding so that it does not cause necrosis or aposteme, nor swelling and similar conditions; and if any of these conditions occur, then be careful with separation from him, and correct what happens as soon as possible, according to what we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	 But if the bone is protruding from the flesh, then you must flatten it as much as possible; and if not, place a poultice on it and leave it there, and treat it with whatever was mentioned earlier until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	 "And sometimes this fracture of the hip is strong enough that it must be set back into place, as we have said in the case of the shoulder and arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	 "However, in the restoration of the patient in this manner, paralysis does not occur; and if it is restored alone, or if the other leg is applied to it, then it is necessary that the patient always walks with a limp.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	 "And know that the hip is strong in forty days or a little more or less, and all this depends on the complexity of the case and other conditions.
Capitol .xv.	 "Chapter XV
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	 "On the restoration of the fracture of the knee joint.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	 "Know that the fracture of the knee joint often occurs late, but it is common for swelling to occur immediately.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	 "But if the fracture occurs, it is not a complete break but rather a crack or split in its parts, with or without bleeding, and all of this depends on the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	 "And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts should be made equal with the aforementioned until it is brought together and joined as much as possible by straightening, easiness, and skill.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	 And then place a poultice and apply it over that round stela, if you need to use it; and bind it tightly with a bandage suitable for this purpose.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	 And then consider all the treatments that we have recommended for other fractures, such as applying heat and similar remedies, to prevent any accidents from occurring with whatever is suitable for him until he is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter XVI
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	 On the restoration of a thigh fracture.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	 Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the femur; the other is thin and is called the fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	 And it happens to each of the types of fracture that happens to both bones of the arm, and for this reason its restoration is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm, with one operation being performed on both.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	 And if two bones are broken at the same time, the thigh is completely shattered.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	 And if the thinner bone is broken, the thigh is shattered in the front part.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	 And if the larger bone is broken, it is behind that one, and this is one of those cases that you are not familiar with.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	 And then administer extension, traction, and ligament tension according to the same principle.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	 However, it is necessary that if the thigh fracture is jagged with many splinters, the extension should be less and lighter, and alleviate it with your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	 And when there is a need to operate on the arm due to a thigh fracture, and you have aligned the bones and completed the entire operation, then take wooden wedges, which are placed under the supports that are usually placed alone, and they are made in the same way as palm branches; choose those with small thickness, not very thick, and their length should be according to the length of the thigh, and the end is deeper.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	 Then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to its length, and place one on the upper part of the thigh on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be as deep as possible towards the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	 Then bind the two bones in three places at each end and in the middle, because with this structure the thigh is prevented from tilting to the right or left side, and it stays in a good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	 And now a bandage of wood has been administered according to the length of the thigh; it has been placed on him, the thigh, so that he remains immobile.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	 And it is especially important that you do this in cases of a fracture, and when dealing with that specific wound.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 And every day consider the thigh and study it closely for any changes, and guard against abscesses and swelling or other similar causes; and if any such cause occurs, then apply appropriate treatment until he is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	 Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	 The ankle does not fracture completely; rather, it is the bones of the foot that sometimes fracture; and the toes of the foot rarely fracture, and it only happens to them when they are in poor condition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	 And if the bones of the foot seem to be fractured and these bones are raised up above one another, then place the patient's foot on the ground as if walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	 And then place the other foot on top of the raised bone, and press down, and splint it until it returns to its original position.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	 And then place a poultice and cotton on top, and place beneath the foot a small board with two flat surfaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	 And then strengthen it by pulling the foot downward with a descent structure, since you have wrapped it in cloth and other materials as needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	 And after three or four days have passed with the patient, then you should remove the bandage, because you will find that the bones are swollen, or they may be pinched or dislocated, and the operation in these cases is as follows:
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	 But if any bones are pinched, then restore those and swell them as I have shown you in the restoration of the hand's fingers.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	 And then place on the pinched finger a splint according to its length, and let it be slightly wider than the finger; and then place the foot on the previously mentioned board, and strengthen it with a suitable structure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	 But if what is pinched among the bones are two or three or more, then place on each finger a splint of its quantity wrapped in linen cloth, and strengthen the board at the bottom of the foot, and let it stand on one of the flat surfaces of the board under the foot so that it holds it securely.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	 And it is fitting for you to remember not to overlook all the causes that have been mentioned to you in other accidents that we have discussed; and be prepared for any accident with what is necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	 Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	 Of the fracture of the woman's knee, the man's shinbone, and the penis.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	 When the woman's knee is broken, then make her sit in a chair with her back bent slightly forward and hold her behind the back.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	 And then the matron should fill the knee with cotton, and it should be done in the same manner as shown; and then the woman should be shaken, and her back raised little by little, because all this is forgotten until the fracture is before the part of the knee as shown and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	 And then place cushions on her back, and when she needs to urinate, gently remove the cotton, and let her urinate, and replace it and return it as you did at the beginning, and then return to her first position.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	 And do this for seven days or thereabouts, because by then it will be healed.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	 And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and attach a reed to its opening; then insert the entire bladder into his wound, and afterwards blow into the reed with all your might until the bladder is inflated inside the wound, for the fracture will return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	 And let it be filled with cotton and kept there for several days, as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	 And when the bone of a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and consolidation that which we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	 And that which is correct is not hidden in these nearby fractures and rarely happens, especially to those who have some learning and use and understand this my book well; for that fracture signifies to you the major dispositions by the right way in its restoration and fixation, and therefore understand it well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	 But in the case of a man's penis when it is broken, take an eagle's eggshell, and put the penis into it; then place over it a cloth wrap, and let it be wrapped up, and afterwards let it be laid aside for three days or around that number, and let it heal.
Capitol .xix.	 **Capítulo XIX.**
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	 **Sobre la curación de fracturas óseas cuando hay herida.**
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	 **Es conveniente para aquel al que le ocurre una fractura con herida, y especialmente si el hueso es grande, como el fémur o la tibia, u otro similar, que te cuidarás de hacerle flebotomía tan pronto como las condiciones de flebotomía lo permitan, tal como hemos dicho anteriormente.**
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	 **Y si la herida sangra, entonces debes asegurarte de detener el sangrado, por lo que espolvorearás sobre ella pólvora seca, a menos que haya otra causa.**
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	 **Y luego comienza a curar la fractura el mismo día y no postergues esto, a menos que ocurra un absceso.**
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	 **Pero si ocurre un absceso, entonces debes dejar la restauración de la fractura hasta el noveno día, cuando el absceso haya disminuido, y no te acerques a él en los tres primeros días ni en los siguientes cuatro, porque causarás accidentes adversos.**
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	 **Pero si el hueso está fracturado de manera prominente sobre la parte descubierta del cráneo, entonces debes esforzarte en reducirlo y alinearlo con tus manos con facilidad y con poca extensión.**
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	 Based on the provided pattern, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	 And he is returned (to consciousness), and there is little pain in him so that he is not bent double, then place the compress on him at the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	 And it is an acute extremity that has margins in its extremities; and it is above him, tending to swell, and from the middle of him enters into parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And this is his form:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	 And it is called in Greek "labrys willing to cut," which means small hammer or axe.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	 Therefore, the pointed extremity should be placed on top of the eminent bone's extremity.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	 And you impale it in one stroke until the bone returns and is made equal.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	 And so you strive to make the extremities of the fracture equal between them, and if the broken extremity is thin, and does not accept the instrument well, then you must insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	 But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have recommended, then insert it with something that is suitable for it from among the inserters which we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	 And then grind that which remains in the bones into fine particles.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	 And when the bone is reduced, and if the patient then finds very intense toothache-like pain, know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and in that case, do what you can to help the patient greatly.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	 When you have finished the restoration that you are doing on the bone, then submerge a cloth in strong black wine (vinegar), especially if it is summer, and do not place wax or any other oily substance on the wound, so that putrefaction and corruption will not occur in it.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	 And then administer stitches at the time of your completion of the bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can clean it with tweezers and use dressings according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	 And be very careful not to strain the wound with the fracture, for many foolhardy physicians have done this and caused death or severe illness in their patients. This is unhealthy.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	 And if the scar is light and soft, different from the scars of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	 And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear that bad accidents might occur as we have mentioned, and you find pain in the area, then it is not appropriate to place bandages on that area. Instead, make an envelope of hard cloths in the place of bandages and strengthen it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	 And when after one day or two the wound has already started to generate pus, then you should remove the cloth that you had placed on it with forceps, and then administer warm compresses, ointments which are commonly used for treating wounds, such as tetrapharmacon and similar ointments.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	 And it is advisable for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every day in the morning and evening until it is healed and sealed, and it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that pus can flow from it towards the lower parts easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	 If many days have passed and the wound is not healed or separated from the pus, then you should know that here are the actions of small worms; therefore, it is necessary to probe the wound with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	 And from those actions, those that are separated are to be removed and extracted; but those that cannot be separated and affect the limb and cause pain, you must endeavor to cut them out as much as possible.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	 And if the wound is infected with pus or matter, and it becomes suppurative or another type of corruption and putrefaction, then you should apply to each of these [infections] that which is appropriate for them from the treatment of which the preceding narrative is in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	 And concerning which you should direct your attention and present your judgment: when the bone is crushed, it protrudes from the member like the bones of the pelvis and the hips, and resembles those of the large members, and you should not attempt to remove it, nor its extraction, because often death results from this; leaving it in place so that it may ossify, for if it is strong, it will fall off by itself within about 20 or 30 days; then heal the wound if you see fit, and if not leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	 Chapter XX
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	 Of the treatment of nodules that occur as a result of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	 This nodule often occurs in the wake of a fracture's healing process, particularly near the joints, and it takes on the shape of the member, and very strongly inhibits the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	 Here's the translation of your provided text:
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	 And allow no constriction to remain there for more than a few days; then remove it and replace it with another, until the swelling has subsided; or place a lead sheet on that area firmly, because lead has the property of reducing all inflammations in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 But if the swelling has already turned into stone and it is tight and necessitates being removed urgently, then cut through it in its most superior part, and cut away the excess and prominent parts, or rasp it with sharp rasps until it subsides; and treat that area until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	 On the restoration of a fracture, when it is restored and then the limb remains subtle and frail, not according to its natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	 When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb remains subtle and frail, this happens only for several reasons: one of which is an excess of dissolution of the ligament and its binding, not done as it should be; or due to an excessive tightness of the ligaments so that the nourishment cannot reach the limb; or due to an excess of superfluous bandaging; or due to inappropriate movement at the wrong time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and their weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	 And the treatment for this is to give food to the patient and make their heart tender until their blood is replenished within them; administer a bath; and interject joy and happiness upon them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	 Then place a poultice on the member, so that the poultice draws out the unhealthy nourishment, or continue to bathe it with tepid water until the nourishment runs and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	 Concerning the treatment of broken bones when they are set crookedly, and you forbid the operation of correcting them as necessary.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	 When it happens to the member that has been set crookedly and with a protrusion of the broken bone and swelling, and this is due to the faulty shape of the member; however, the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, then you should not accept the word of someone who thinks that the member has just been broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	 But there have been many foolish physicians and surgeons who have done this in our land, and this operation is highly reprehensible, leading to great fear, the sign of which is death.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	 But if the limping and swelling are recent, then they should be bathed with tepid water in which are soaked softening herbs such as leaves of mallow and roots of althaea, and melilot, and similar to those; and a plaster should be made with a softening plaster such as diacutylon well-made; or take the root of althaea and mix it with egg white or oil of camomile, and make a plaster with that; or take fat figs and mash them with pigeon dung, and similar to those of the medicines which are named amers, consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	 And sometimes it is resolved with gentle and persistent friction, using the hands moistened slightly, and the member should be moved in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	 But if the condition has advanced and is severe, turning into a stone, and surgical intervention is necessary, then it should be cut above the ankle, and the continuity of the bone should be dissolved. The excess material from the knot of that same bone should be removed with fine incisions, and facilitation should be administered to that person with care and diligence.
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter .23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	 On speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	 Dislocation is the displacement of one of its joints from its proper place, impeding movement and distorting the figure of the member, causing great pain and injury in the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	 Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it should be reduced immediately and not delayed, because if it is delayed, the site becomes swollen and difficult to reduce due to fluid accumulation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	 And for this reason, it should not be moved or stretched during the time of swelling, because multiple views cause spasm and severe pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	 When this happens, it is necessary for you to turn to the patient's bloodletting, and then let the pus drain; and then wrap the affected area with hot water and oil, and then reduce it gently.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	 And let every member be treated with water that comes to mind in its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	 And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what was mentioned earlier about fracture, from the highest part of the body down to the lowest part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 Chapter 24
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	 About treating the dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	 If both jaws are dislocated simultaneously and not much time has passed; the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are moved from their places by a small displacement and are somewhat softened, or they are completely dislocated to the point where they are softened at the joint, until saliva flows from the patient's mouth and he cannot hold it nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in its own words.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	 But when the dislocation is minor, it often returns to normal on its own with little effort.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 And it is that the assistant hold the head of the patient, and the doctor insert his thumb from one hand into the socket of the dislocated jaw inside the mouth of the patient, if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, and let the other fingers rest outside with which he balances himself; and command the patient to relax their jaws and allow them to move freely in any direction; and the doctor balances the jaw and moves it back until it returns to its proper place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	 And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then apply a warm compress with hot water and oil until a light reduction of both is achieved, and do not delay the complete reduction of both, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	 And once they have returned and are balanced, and the patient's mouth is closed but not softened, then place a bandage of cloth with wax on top, made from wax and rose oil; and then bind it gently with soft bands.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	 And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head resting between two pillows, so that it does not turn to the right or left side; and do not force them to chew anything; if they are hungry, give them soft food until the pain has subsided and the jaws have healed, then let them eat whatever they want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	 And this should be administered with ease, and without difficulty through the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, and speaking until the jaw is healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	 And if the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult and they are not returned to their places, then it usually happens that fevers and constant sweating occur, and the patient's stomach becomes very swollen, and he vomits pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	 And when you see this, then know that it is fatal; and it usually happens that he who experiences this dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	 On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the end of the clavicle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	 The collarbone is not dislocated from the inside due to its continuous connection with the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated on the outer side, and this can be felt by touch.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	 And its restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	 Then you should press the area firmly with your palm, because it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	 Then place a plaster and bandages on it and strengthen that area.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	 "However, if the end of the shoulder is continuous with it, then it has not been dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and splinted according to what we have said and according to your skill.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	 "Then place a plaster, powder, and bandage on it, and instruct the patient to maintain tranquility and rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	 "And with this same treatment, the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	 "Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	 "On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	 "Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the small bone to the large bone.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	 "And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, which is rare; and it is not dislocated to the parts behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated to the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	 "And most commonly it is dislocated and comes out at the parts below the small bone, and this occurs more easily in those with little flesh, but in those with much flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	 And if a strong blow or fall happens to some men, and the muscle of the person becomes swollen with acute inflammation, it is suspected that this is a dislocation due to that.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	 Then you should approach him so that you are above him, and then proceed with his care.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	 And the dislocation of it is known when in the joints you should tickle; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find in the head of the muscle concavity and after tickling you should touch the head of the muscle as if it were an egg, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to their ear, nor can they move it more.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	 If it is dislocated, you should do so with the feet or hands, and then you will find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	 And this dislocation can be reduced lightly when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	 And the reduction of it is that the attendant lifts the patient's hand to the joint above; and then places their fingers under the ticklish part of it, and raises the joint with strength back into its place, and the attendant lifts the patient's hand, and extends it upward; and then places it beneath because it returns lightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	 Based on the context and patterns from the previous text, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	 Based on the context and similarity to other medieval medical texts, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	 And if you wish to proceed in this manner: it is that you have present a man who is taller than the patient and stands on the side of his legs. He should insert his muscle beneath the patient's shoulder blade and lift the shoulder blade up until the patient is suspended in the air, while another assistant pulls the patient's hand from their side below their belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	 But if the patient is light, it is necessary that another person be suspended with them, in order to make them heavier, because the dislocation returns quickly otherwise.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 And it can also be reduced in another manner: that is, a long pole should be planted into the ground with a rounded head like a mortar pestle, not too thick or thin. Then drapes should be placed beneath the patient, and the patient should stand according to the length of the pole. Then their hand should be extended toward one side, while their body is firmly pulled in the opposite direction, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	 And if it is difficult to reduce the patient for all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this remedy: that you take a pole whose length is two arms long and width four fingers, and its thickness should be thinner at the top according to this shape:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	 And immediately over the head, a linen cloth should be placed so that the patient is not injured by the beam.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	 And immediately place yourself under the patient's shoulders, and extend your arm or hand over the beam between the supports, and bind the beam to the supports and arms and the tip of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	 Immediately place your arm on a step of the ladder according to its length, and extend your hand between the parts, and let the other body part hang from the other side, because the joint will be entered soon.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	 And when the insertion of it is completed according to whatever manner that is possible for you, then it is necessary that you place under the shoulder a pad made of wool of equal thickness; and immediately apply a plaster prepared from powdered myrobalan with honey and egg white over all the muscles, so that it is wrapped around, and immediately bind under the shoulder with a decent bandage; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and his hand should be attached to his neck, and he should be left alone, and his hand should not be moved for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	 It is necessary that the patient's food should be reduced to little, until the member has been comforted, for it is lighter for his healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	 And if food is given after about seven days and movement is exercised; and then if it is stopped and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	 However, if the joint is dislocated due to excessive moisture that happens to him or for another reason, then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three holes, as was said before in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	 And if all this is done and after about seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not fixed, and the plaster and the tightness are reduced some times over him, and it is not fixed but rather he cannot raise that arm to its place above, then know that his nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be put back in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	 In the case of a dislocation that is made in the feet and the breasts or parts behind, the reduction is done with pressure and stretching with the hands until it returns to its place.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And another bandage should be applied to it, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	 And if it happens near the time of healing that there is heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should take many baths until that heaviness is relieved and his nature returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxvii.	 The phrase "Capitol .xxvii." translates to "Chapter XXVII." This is indicating that what follows is part of Chapter 27 in this medieval medical treatise.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	 "De curacio de dislocacio del coyde." translates to "About the treatment of shoulder dislocation." This sentence indicates that the text will discuss methods for treating a dislocated shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	 "Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	 And it is necessary that you make cuts and immediately reduce the dislocation before an abscess forms, because if an abscess forms, reducing it becomes difficult, and recovery is not certain; this is especially true when the dislocation occurs in the back, for it is the worst of all types of dislocations, with more severe pain, and many times people die from that.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	 And its restoration, when possible, is done by extending the patient's hand with two hands, and spreading their arm, and placing the physician's hands on the elbow and beneath it, and the doctor pushes the joint back into place with the thumb and index finger of both hands or with the edge of the palm until it returns to its original position.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	 However, if the dislocation is in the front, then return it by bending the hand with its own hand until you strike the elbow with the edge of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	 And if the dislocation does not respond to reduction, then apply violent extension and much force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	 And two assistants should extend the arm, and both should hold it firmly in place so that it is not moved during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	 And then you should gently roll the arms in all directions, as they are wrapped in long-folded cloth or bandages around the patient's hands.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	 And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil so that this helps to facilitate the lubrication of the joint; then he should strongly press on the joint until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	 Then, after the reduction of the dislocation, it should be placed on a poultice that contains astringent and absorbent properties with egg white, and it should be tied firmly in place. The arm should be hung from the neck, and it should be left like this for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	 And then it should be unbound; and if the joint has returned to its proper place, then you should remove the bandage from the patient and leave it that way.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	 And if you see that the joint is not strengthening, then you should reapply the poultice and the bandage, and leave it like this for several days until it is strengthened; then unbind it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	 But if there is severe pain around the time of the joint reduction and the patient's condition is unstable, then administer moist heat in the form of baths and subtle friction, along with compression until it is relieved; or place a weight on the affected joint, such as a heavy cushion; and then bind it tightly, leaving it in this position day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	 Here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	 In the process of bathing, enter until it is complete.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	 And if you wish, place over that moist and scraped cow skin flap and strain on it; do this several times, because that (the flap) is moist and returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter 28
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	 On the treatment of dislocation, particularly of the joint between the arm and hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	 Dislocation of the hand can sometimes occur, and its reduction is easy, unlike that of other joints. However, it is important to quickly reduce it at the moment it becomes dislocated, before an abscess forms or a dangerous abscess develops.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 The reduction of the dislocation is as follows: you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and instruct them to extend their hand. The physician then places their hand or palm over the prominence of the joint, and pushes until it returns to its original position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	 However, it should be considered whether the palm is already separated from the back of the hand. If so, have the patient place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; if the dislocation is posterior to the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be intrinsically on the table, so that the physician's hand falls over the prominence of the joint. iety
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	 And therefore if it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a poultice to encourage the abscess to drain and leave it; and do not repeat this, because otherwise you will not be able to endure or resist the return of pus in the following days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	 But nevertheless the joint remains according to its twisted nature; and do not attribute any cause to the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then know that the nerves are pinched or torn, and there is no remedy for it except to strengthen it with a cautery near the affected area and you will give it some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	 Therefore, when the illness has returned, then place on it the poultice that we have mentioned, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; and afterwards it should be loosened and left, and the hand of the patient should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	 But if the patient's movement is obstructed and some gravity occurs in them, then relieve that with hot water and friction several times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	 Of the treatment of dislocation of the aforementioned (limbs).
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	 Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les dits a tota partida.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	 And when one of these bones is dislocated at the back of the palm or on its underside, then hold the bone and press with your fingers until it returns to its original position.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	 And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that which is dislocated from the affected part for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	 And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened in its proper place on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	 And at night, bandage it according to the instructions, and do not stop unwrapping it during the day and exercising with movement, and bandage it again at night; and do this for a few days until it is healed.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	 And do the same if it is dislocated on the back of the hand; bandage it to that part and perform the first operation with your fingers until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	 And similarly, do this when it is dislocated in other places.
Capitol .xxx.	 Chapter .30
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	 Of the treatment of spinal dislocation.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	 When a complete dislocation of one of the spine's vertebrae occurs, or when many vertebrae are displaced from their proper positions, then there is no cure for it, because death will come to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	 This sentence describes symptoms of an involuntary bodily function and paralysis or loss of movement in certain limbs. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	 Therefore, when it is moved to the posterior parts, it is called jaundice.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	 But the cure for it is that one should consider whether the jaundice occurs in infancy, because then there is neither a cure nor complete healing for it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	 However, in cases where it occurs due to injury or bruising or something similar to those, the ancients have described the methods of cure in lengthy discourses, from which the most profit is derived; but I have abbreviated that from which little is omitted due to its excessive length, for the sake of my own conciseness in this presentation. With this, I have expounded and compiled it from various sources with which I will show and explain it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	 And I say that in jaundice which occurs in the anterior part of the feet, there is neither cause nor healing for it; and similarly in cases where it affects both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	 And none of these are cured except those that occur specifically in the back, as I will relate.  :)
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	 And it is that the patient should be laid flat on his back close to a wall, and below him there should be a moist cloth so that his feet are not raised.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	 And then a straight stick should be placed, stuck in the ground at the extreme end of the foot near their head, and another stick underneath their feet at the other end of the foot.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	 And one assistant should hold the stick, ensuring it is not fixed in a hole; and another assistant should hold the other one similarly.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 And then wrap the bandages around the patient's head and tie them firmly at the end of the bandage near their head, and attach it to the stick; and then stretch another bandage over their shoulders behind them and across their thighs; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick underneath their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	 And then each assistant should extend the bandages to the end of the stick, and ensure that neither the two sticks nor the bandages are moved from their positions in which they were placed; however, they should not be fixed as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	 And the physician should place their palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or they can place something flat over it, and then they should adjust their feet on the flat surface until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	 But if it does not return with this method, then take a board whose length or width is at least three arms' length, and make an opening in the wall near where the patient is lying, so that the end of the board can fit through it.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	 And place a round stick on which there is a pulley, and let it be turned in the two holes of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	 And at the end of it is a hole into which the stick is inserted, the length of which is one hand span more than that which is turned; and in the other two sticks there are similar ones.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 And then tighten the bindings that you have tied around the feet of the patient in the hole which should be over their head, and the bindings that you have tied around their thighs on the pulley which should be over their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	 And then each pulley should be attended by a servant who turns the pulley with his hand, and the doctor straightens the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	 And this is how the pulley works:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	 And after the spine has been straightened and the area smoothed out, then it is necessary to place a dry paste with egg white on it, and then wool; and then place on the paste a board whose width is three fingers or around that, and whose length covers the area of the swelling, and let it be placed on the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	 And then bind it with the binding we mentioned earlier, and let the patient eat light food until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	 And if there remains any swelling in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medications that soften and cleanse with the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already in that place a lead sheet has been administered.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	 And sometimes swelling occurs in the last of the vertebrae of the back, and it is believed that this is due to dislocation; and it is that bone which has already swollen, so it is not advisable to make an incision on it with this medicine, for it will cause you to die.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter 31
De curacio de anca dislocada.	 On the treatment of dislocated hips.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	 Know that the hip joint and the muscle joint are considered only as dislocations, and not what happens to other small joints with slight displacement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	 And the hip joint can be dislocated in four ways, either to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	 And it is most commonly dislocated towards the inner parts, and rarely towards the front or the back.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	 Here is the translation of your sentence:
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	 And the sign of someone who has experienced dislocation is that the affected parts are moved outward, indicating that this condition opposes other conditions.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	 And the sign of dislocation occurring in front is that the affected thigh extends according to its length, but without bending it unless there is pain in the joint; and if one tries to walk and cannot, then it is dislocation in front; and his urine is retained and he has a swelling, and you should make him walk on his heels.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	 And the sign of dislocation occurring in back is that the joint does not extend, nor can it bend as much as the other side; and the thigh is shorter than the other, and the knee is swollen, and you should bring the head of the femur to its place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	 However, the reduction of these types of dislocation depends on whether you consider it to be old and chronic, in which case it is better not to attempt reduction immediately but rather to let it remain in its current position; in such cases, immediate action is not necessary.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	 But in the case of recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocation, you should turn the joint and extend it towards the inside and towards the outside, to the right and to the left, for quickly returns and does not require any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	 This appears to be describing a procedure involving stretching or extending the patient's body. Let's break it down:
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	 And let the extension of all of them be in one go, until the patient is raised from the ground and remains suspended.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	 And this type of extension is common to all four [limbs].
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	 And therefore if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; and if not, then all sorts of things must be done for the proper treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	 In the reduction of itself, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is in the interior parts, it is necessary that the patient be placed supine on their back; and then place the straps on the front of the thigh at the point between the head of the thigh and the location that is below the groin; and then extend the strap above the groin to the highest part of the fork.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	 And then another strong minister should take the arms of the patient, and firmly grasp the thick part of the injured thigh and extend it outward with great force, because that returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	 And this is a lighter treatment by which this member is reduced than the others.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	 But if it is resistant to you and does not obey the treatment with this type of cure entirely, then it is necessary that both feet of the patient be tied together strongly but lightly on both heels and both soles.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	 And let the length of each be by the quantity of four words, and let the sick leg be extended more than the other by a quantity of two words.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	 And let the patient be suspended over the top of the post, and that they are upright; and let their length from the ground be the quantity of two arms' lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 And immediately command a strong young man to cut off the head of the cushion, and let another young man be suspended with the patient, and let the other young man pull the cushion with strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	 But in the proper reduction, when it is a dislocation outward from its original position, it is necessary that the patient lies on his back as we have recommended when they are swollen; and let the bandage be tightened strongly over the sick leg specifically and over their feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	 And immediately two posts should be placed: one under their feet, and the other under their head; and let the drape be wrapped around adjusted posts placed in the middle of the bed, so that the patient is not injured because the post is between their thighs, for you must ensure that the extension to the sides does not pull.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	 And then each assistant stretches out on their side, and the physician with his hand guides the reduction according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	 Therefore, if it obeys the reversal, it will be good; and if not, press firmly on that spot and in this manner as we have said in gentleness for that guidance.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	 But make sure the patient lies flat on their back quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	 And when the dislocation is in front of the joint, it is necessary that the leg be slightly extended; and it is according to this same story placed on the stump; and the physician places the palm of his right hand on the patient's ankle, and then pulls that with the other hand, and with that pulling presses that which is extended behind towards the inner part of the knee.  />
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	 And if the dislocation is behind the joint, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended backwards and raised off the ground; rather, it is better that he be placed on a hard surface, as is appropriate for elevation if his hip is dislocated towards the outside, as we have said about placing him over two hips; and it is on its face with its limbs extended, as we have said, it has no difference.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	 And it is necessary that a compress with a board be placed over the joint area.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	 Therefore, when the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction of the patient is not hidden from you, which is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those hips and the patient stretches their leg and expands it without hesitation, then know that the member according to what is needed has returned — at that moment you place two cushions and put plaster and extract with a bandage so that the swelling is not increased in any of the parts; and let the patient rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	 Then promptly remove the bandage and the plaster, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	 At that moment, if you see those hips equally, then know that the dislocation is already healed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	 And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that area, and extract it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	 Then promptly remove that, and make the patient delay in walking on each foot for several days, until they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter .32
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	 About the cure for dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	 The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the front parts outside, and to the front parts inside, and more towards the back parts than the front parts; and it cannot be dislocated to the front parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	 And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to apply his leg with his thigh; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	 And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the patient lie down straight, so that he can extend his leg if possible; adhere your back to his face, and place his foot between your feet; then make the shoulder adhere with your palms, and hold those between your said parts over his shoulder with strength, and another assistant extends his foot until the shoulder returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	 And the sign of reduction is that his leg adheres to his thigh with effortless lightness.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 Then bandage it and make the thigh adhere to the leg, and then bind them together at the same time with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbind them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	 And do not use the patient for walking for some days, until they are healed and strengthened.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	 But if the reduction of him to you is difficult, then administer strong extension with bandages as described in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	 Of the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	 The ankle is sometimes displaced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated suddenly, and the dislocation occurs either at the inner or outer parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	 And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle swelling towards the side to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	 But the treatment of its slight displacement is easy recovery, which is that it should be extended with ease by hand and wrapped until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	 But in the treatment of it when suddenly dislocated, it is necessary for you to stop the patient straight, and let him have a strong and vigorous servant behind his back in the middle of him.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	 And then you should take with your right hand the foot from the upper side, and with your left hand from the lower side of the foot at the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	 And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then twice more with the left hand, and then extend it with the left hand; and press the soles of the foot with the right hand below the knee without effort.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	 And do this two times as we have described.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	 And then press the soles of the foot to the calf the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	 Therefore, if it returns once or twice in this manner, and you see the foot swollen, that is good; but if not, then repeat the operation on him, because it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	 But if it is forbidden for you to reduce him with what we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a strong rope on the ground, and let it slip between his thighs, and you have already wrapped cloth around him so that the patient does not hurt.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	 And then let the servant hold his thighs, and then another servant extend the foot with their hands or with a band that lies on the top of the foot; and then let each servant extend against the extension of their partner, and let the rope be extended between the patient's thighs holding him, so that his body is not pulled to the sides beyond its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	 And immediately the physician reduces the dislocation with his hands, while another assistant holds the healthy side below, because the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	 And once the dislocation has returned and its healing reduction is evident to you, then place a plaster and fasten it strongly with bandages, and bind the foot to the leg with a bandage.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	 And you should be careful or guard against the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over them is not too tight and does not press on them strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	 And then leave it alone for two days or three; and if the bandage is softened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	 And then unbind him on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	 But if he is forced to move during that time, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be dissolved and ruined on him, and then it will not receive healing.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	 And if an abscess occurs to him, then you should administer to him the treatment that we have described earlier in another place of treatment and application, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	 **Chapter 34**
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	 **On the Treatment of Dislocation of Toes.**
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	 **It is recommended that the dislocated toe be bandaged with little tension without struggle; and this is not difficult, but rather easy.**
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	 **However, if the dislocation is in any of the toes of the foot, then it is necessary for you to make the patient sit on a bench or table, and have him stand as if he were walking.**
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	 **And then you should stand on the foot of the patient and place your foot over where you think the joint is, and then press down firmly with your foot until it returns to its proper position, and you see that it is bandaged and does not appear prominent.**
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	 **And then place under the sole of the patient's foot a board that supports the entire foot, which has two ends, and then bind it with decent and firm strength for three days; and then unbind it and make the patient rest from walking for several days, until it is strengthened and healing is assured.**
Capitol .xxxv.	 **Chapter 35**
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	 **On the Types of Dislocation that may be caused by a Wound or Fracture or Both.**
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	 When some of these causes occur and you endeavor in the treatment of it and the restoration of him, many times death follows.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	 And for that reason it is not proper to presume over his treatment except by someone who is wise in the art, with long experience, compassionate and merciful, slow, not hasty or presumptuous; and who uses in the beginning medicines that check inflammations cautiously, and leaves the patient to divine judgment unless you expect recovery from destruction, and with relief of the illness, and in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	 And therefore strive first to bring about his reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes an inflammation.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	 And then if the member returns as we wish, administer a regimen that will check inflammation and cure the wound with what is appropriate from the drying ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	 And if there is dislocation with fracture and the bones are separated, then you should attempt to bring them together, and do what we have said in the cases of simple injuries that preceded these places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	 And beware and avoid according to your ability that which leads to the paths of fear as I have predicted for you; for this is better for you, more lasting to your glory, and healthier for your true body in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Amen.	 Amen.
