Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	 "Thus begin the words of Avicenna.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	 "Oh, children, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, and by completing it its end is achieved, and by its expositions, and by its explanations, it seems to me that I complete it for you with this treatise, which is a part of the operation with the hand, that is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	 "For the operation with the hand is rejected in our region and in our time of all privation, until very little remains of its science, and its traces are erased; and nothing remains of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have changed the most and have become errors and confusions, to the point that their intentions are closed and its power and art are weakened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	 "And it seems to me that I revive it with the organization of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of the cautery tools and the other instruments of the work as it is by addition of the declaration, and for its preparation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	 This text discusses the difficulty of finding a good physician in the present time due to the length and complexity of medical training. It emphasizes that to be proficient in medicine, one must have extensive knowledge of anatomy, including the structure and function of various body parts, their connections and separations, and the number and arrangement of bones, nerves, sinews, and blood vessels (both pulsatile and quiet ones). The author also mentions the importance of understanding the places where these vessels emerge. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	 And for that reason, Hippocrates said that it is not just a word, but small in name and greater in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	 But we have already spoken of that in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will fall into error by which men die, as I have seen happen too often, because some are trained in this science and then cast it aside without knowledge or experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	 For I saw a foolish and inexperienced physician cut into an ulcerous abscess on the neck of a woman, and he also cut some arteries in the neck, causing a great deal of blood to flow until the woman fell dead into his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	 And I saw another physician who attempted to remove a stone from a man who had developed an issue in his bladder; the stone was large, and it came out with a piece of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	 And I myself was called to extract it, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew for certain that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	 And I saw another physician who took payment of a duc from our land for surgery, and he treated a negro castrato who had a fracture in his thigh; and the physician, with his ignorance, extracted the fracture through the wound with cushions and bandages with strong compression, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	 And then you unbind him according to his wishes, and then you rebinding him, and then you leave him dry for several days, and command that we do not bind the bandage; and this way we proceed until the swelling in his foot is abated, and it reaches a state of healing.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	 And I was called to him, and prepared to unbind the bandage, and thus his tranquility was achieved, and similarly he admitted to his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	 But since the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and it could not be restrained, and ceased to spread the corruption in the member until the patient perished.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	 And I saw another physician who punctured a cancerous swelling, and it became ulcerated after several days, until the evil of it was increased by the lord of him.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	 The reason for this is that the black cancer is entirely of melancholic humors, and it is not necessary to have iron in all parts, but rather in the member which feels all of it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	 And therefore, my sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand should be carried out in two ways: one is an operation associated with health, and another is a work involving great risk in the greatest dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	 And I have already mentioned this in every place of this book where an operation is performed that involves error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to watch out for this and avoid it, so that the pages do not find a way to speak and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	 And therefore, take up your weapons with care and under the protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	 And use the best way with God's grace for them to attain health and praiseworthy success, and avoid the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and keep your weapons away from what causes you fear, so that doubt in your faith and in your name does not elude you: for it is more beneficial to your glory, and both now and later, to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	 I have already said this in some of my previous works:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	 "Do not treat evil patients, lest you be called evil doctors.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	 And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	 Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first chapter.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	 The first chapter concerns the head, specifically the forms of instruments and the irons of the cautery, and what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	 "The division of the second section.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	 "The second chapter, on cupping and incision, and on cupping glasses, and on wounds, and on the extraction of arrows and similar things, all categorized and arranged according to the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	 "Division of the third section.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	 "The third chapter, on reduction and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; a chapter arranged from the head to the feet, and on the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	 "On cautery with fire and with sharp medicine, and on remembering the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	 "With this begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	 "I want to say what are the advantages and disadvantages of that type of cautery, and in which circumstances it is forbidden.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	 "So I say that the discussion about the advantages and disadvantages of cautery is a long and complex discourse, subtle in its knowledge and secretly hidden; and many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, and only a little of their discussions reaches me, fearing to be too lengthy.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	 "And therefore I say that you should perform cautery in every circumstance, whether it involves matter or not, except for two circumstances, which are cold and dry conditions without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	 In this case of cold and dry illness with matter, it is necessary to remember; because some say that cautery is helpful for that, while others say the opposite of that, that cautery is not suitable for an illness caused by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate that a cold and dry illness be healed with something hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	 Say the opposite of that, that through cautery there is improvement in all cold and dry illnesses that occur in men's bodies, because when you compare a man's body and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find the man's body to be cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	 And I say by the words of that, that experience has revealed this to me many times before.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	 However, it is not necessary to discuss this matter further with someone who has already been instructed and practiced in the chapter on cautery through previous practice, and who knows the diversity of men's constitutions, the disposition of their illnesses within them, the causes of those illnesses, their accidents, and the time course of those illnesses.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	 But in other constitutions, there is no need to fear, and especially in cold and moist illnesses, because all physicians have agreed on these, and they are not disagreed upon in the improvement with cautery in those cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	 And know, children, that the secret of treatment through cautery with fire and its goodness lies in that the fire is simple, the action of which only reaches the member that is being cauterized, and it does no harm to the other members connected to it except for a small injury.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	 But the action of medicine cautery reaches those members that are close to it, and it easily brings about difficult healing in the sick member and is quickly applied.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	 But fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does nothing but burn away superfluous matter. And it is known to us through experience and the long service of study in this art concerning the truth of causes; and for that reason I am excused from the length of this discourse. And if it were not that it is not written in my book, here I would reveal to you a secret hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion by which diseases are expelled, demonstrated with philosophical reasoning, which would be suitable for your intellects.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	 And know, children, that they disagree about the time in which it is suitable to perform cautery and they establish the best time as spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	 And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the damage from an accidental moment is submerged in the help of what is drawn with the cautery, and especially if the cauterization is for painful or necessary pains, forces, and fistulas, which do not tolerate delay, lest something worse should come from them, which is greater than a minor injury entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	 And this is what is in your minds, or sons, that only the common people and foolish doctors think so, since the illness that is cured by cauterization does not return at all times, and they claim that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	 And the reason is not as they think, because cauterization is only used in places where medicine alters the complexion and dries up the moisture that causes pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	 However, cauterization exceeds medicine in effectiveness due to its strength and the power of its operation, as well as the greatness of its practitioner.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	 And it is possible that their illness may return at some point in time, depending on the patient's complexion and the location of their illness, as well as the patient's strength and what has been prepared in their body from the accumulation of superfluidities, and what they have acquired through their diet and similar causes. However, if the illness for which cauterization is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and moisture, such as cautery for toothache and the like, it is possible that the pain will not return in them, but this is done rarely.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	 And it is commonly said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this is a true statement, as I understand it, because I believe there is no cure that can be achieved with medicine or any other means except through cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	 And the reason is contrary to this; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when the ways of cure are administered in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not succeed, and then at the end of the cause one administers cautery, and it benefits in this.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	 And from here, I conclude that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which I understand from the common people and too many foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	 And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this not for any other reason than for the equality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	 And they said that the place of cautery does not burn, as if this were absolutely true. For I have proven and found that this is not so in all bodies, but only in some without others, and cautery with it is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you make cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want by the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive a burn. And if you put a fire on it, the gold melts from the heat, and some sheets fall into the fire by which the craftsman loses his occupation.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	 Here's my attempt at translating that line into English:
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	 Here is the translation of the given text into English:
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	 "On treating headaches caused by coldness and dampness.
Le capitol primier.	 "The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	 "This cauterization treats coldness and dampness in the body, which are the two causes of many ailments. It is effective against headaches, excessive earwax, persistent yawning, toothaches, sore throats, and generally any illness caused by coldness, such as paralysis, fever, stroke, and similar conditions.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	 "The method for this cauterization is as follows: firstly, instruct the patient to take a laxative medication to cleanse the bowels for three or four nights, depending on the patient's strength, age, and habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	 "And then instruct them to shave their head with a razor. Then have that person sit between your hands on a low bench, and have them place their feet on the ground.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	 "Then place the sharp edge of your palm close to the bridge of the nose between the patient's eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "However, when your finger reaches the middle of the forehead, mark that spot with a needle. Then heat the cautery stick, which should be olive-shaped like this:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	 And then you place it on the affected area with a tent, in such a way that it descends, and with which the left hand is gently pressed, little by little, and you turn it over.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	 And then you lift your hand slightly and look at the area, and if you see any part of the bone already exposed, even as small as a grain of millet, then raise your hand. But if not, return your hand with that iron, or another one like it, until the bone is visible as I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	 And then take a little salt and dissolve it in water, and leave it on the area for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	 And then place on it a cloth soaked in vinegar and leave it on the area until the scab of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat the area with Tetrapharmakon ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	 And they say that the more open the wound remains, the better the arm gets, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	 And some of them say that the tendon should be cauterized up to the bone, and that the cautery should be held there until a piece of the bone's appearance is burnt.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	 And immediately remove that which is adjacent to the bone, and immediately treat it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	 And others say that with the cautery one should reach to the very back, until it presses strongly on the bone, to the point that the bone breaks, and this is the form of a small operation.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	 And they believe that from that place the vapors of the head are released.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	 And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is healed.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	 But I have not seen these two types of cautery in all cases, only in some men due to fear; and that one, I think, is better with health than without it, because the head is opened by solving its continuity just as we have shown in other members, especially when the patient's head is of a frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	 And the first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion, and with that one works and performs the task healthily.
Capitol segon.	 Chapter two.
Del cauteri del cap.	 On the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	 When persistent and prolonged pain occurs in the entire head of a patient who has used poultices, plasters, head purges, ointments, lotions, caps, helmets, hoods, and similar remedies, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that did not benefit him at all from those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature; and is not frail and finds great cold, then that one should be cauterized again with another cautery near that one a little.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	 And then cauterize that area on the horn of his head with a pointed cautery until the caul is cut off.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	 Cut the caul and expose the bone in the amount we've measured. Cauterize that area with a pointed cautery on the back part of the head in the place called the 'vas', which is where the cupping glass is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	 And be gentle in doing this, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find great pain from this, different from the pain of all other head cauteries.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	 And I say that this cautery should be in its place, for the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is more delicate than the one used to cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is its shape.
Capitol ters.	 Next chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	 On the cautery for non-chronic migraine.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	 When there is severe pain in the head or when pain spreads to the eye, it should be evacuated with purgative medications and other remedies as I have described in the treatment of diseases; and if that does not help, then cautery can be performed in two ways: either by cauterizing with a sharp burning medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	 Here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	 And then cut the painful area on the temple with a sharp lance until it is fully opened, until it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	 And then apply pressure to him with a poultice to relieve the constriction, and leave it there for three hours; then remove it and draw it out, and let the wound be for two or three days, and then place over him a compress soaked in wine until the area begins to heal.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat him with an ointment until he is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	 And if you wish, do so with some burning medicines which I have written about in the twelve treatises on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 But perform cauterization with iron according to this manner: take a cautery of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	 and it is called a nail-head, because its head is like the shape of a nail, with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small protuberance.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	 And then place it on the painful area, and hold your hand — so that the iron rod which is behind does not get burned — and rotate the iron slowly with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	 And if the quantity that is burned by the point of the rod is such that it is most of it, lift your hand so that the vein which is behind does not get burned, lest there be a flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And then soak a cloth in saltwater and place it on the area, leaving it there for three days; and then place a soft cloth with an edge, and then treat with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	 And if you wish, cauterize with the tip of the lancet as for a cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery in this ancient practice.
Capitol quart.	 Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	 On the Cauterization of Ancient Migraine.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	 When you treat migraine with the water method we have mentioned in the previous treatment, and as we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not benefit from the treatment, and sometimes because the illness is not cured by what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then you must heat the lancet until it is white-hot, since you indicate on the place of pain with a line the length of which is the majority of the finger, or as much as that; and place your hand firmly once and strongly hold it until you do not cut the artery and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	 However, it is necessary for you to be careful of the continuation of the jawbone, which is moved by chewing, and that the tendon is not cut and the nerves which move that, and that a spasm does not occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	 This is a challenging text due to its archaic language and potential use of medical terminology specific to the time period in which it was written. Here's my attempt at translating it:
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	 And I come with the recollection of the treatment for blood flow issues related to archery, according to its method, in this section of the book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 And if you see that this treatment does not suffice and the body of the patient can tolerate it, cauterize in the middle part of the head as we have mentioned, and care for the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	 And if you wish, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on archery wounds with a two-pronged cautery, which is considered a better and more effective cauterization.
Capitol .v.	 Chapter V
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	 On Cauterizing Ear Pain
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with laxatives and other treatments mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply the pointed cautery, which is called "punctum." Its form is as follows:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	 And then pierce close to the bone, and let it be guided around the entire ear like a wheel is turned, or in the circumference of each area if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	 Proceed with the cautery from the base of the ear, little by little, further than where you sense the location with your finger.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	 "And if you make cautery points on both ears and remove them, then proceed to heal the areas until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	 "Chapter 6.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	 "On the Cauterization of Torture
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	 "Torture that is cured and can be treated with cauterization is only from the toxins that come through phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	 "Avoid cauterizing the toxin that comes from dryness or nerve spasm.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	 "When you cure this type of torture with jars, clysters, and gargles, and your treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	 "And place your cautery against the opposite side of the affected part, because softening only occurs in the area that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	 "And the method of cauterization is to cauterize with a cautery on the right side of the tip of the ear, slightly higher than the horn of the head, and another on the temple, whose length should be according to the length of the thumb, and hold your hand with the cautery until the amount equivalent to half the thickness of the little finger is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	 And this is the form of the cautery, which is like a small knife, the shape of which is placed in front of the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	 However, it must be more subtle than that one, somewhat like a needle; and it is necessary to remove some of its excess thickness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	 Then care for the area with water until it has healed.
Capitol .vii.	 Chapter VII
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	 On the Cauterization of Old Apoplexy
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	 When apoplexy is old and you are treating it with the water we mentioned earlier, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize them with four cauteries: on all four corners of their head; and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the nape of the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	 And the manner of the cautery is done as described above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	 And if it has already been cauterized on the opening of the stomach, and this is more recent, then care for it with water that has been processed.
Capitol .viii.	 Chapter VIII
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	 On the Cauterization of Forgetfulness Caused by Burns
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	 It is necessary to give the patient, at the beginning, large doses and pills that serve as purgatives.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	 Based on the provided examples, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	 And pause for some time, because that is the manner of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	 And do this according to that medical order which I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	 And thus if by that [method] the patient is healed; and if not, then make three cauteries on the lower part of their head, descending from the higher part of the head down to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	 And pause between each cautery for as long as it takes to recite the Lord's Prayer, and then cure the cautery with water that has been prepared [for this purpose].
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	 But if you see an increase in the patient's condition, and they are tolerating it well, then make a cautery in the middle of the forehead; and if the condition is more severe, then cauterize that [area] above the two eyebrows.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	 Then cure it until it has healed; and let the cauteries be olive-sized, according to the method described above.
Capitol .ix.	 Chapter IX
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	 On Cauterization of the Parotid Glands and Softening of the Entire Body
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	 First, you should perform a cleansing of the head with cupping and water as we have described; then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize it in the middle of the head, and with cauteries on all the forehead, and with cauteries on the back of the head, and with three cauteries on the spine of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	 And if in the illness of excessive softness of the body and the patients are suffering greatly from this strong illness, then cauterize with four cauteries on the spine, and continue with cautery until the skin is charred, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	 And then heal him until he is cured, and this should be called olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	 Chapter 10
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	 On the Cautery of Epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	 Do not cauterize the epileptic unless his epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	 Therefore, it is necessary to cleanse the brain at its beginning with yarrow and the other cure that we mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffers from the rejection of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	 And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicine, then administer gargles and swallowing agents that cleanse the throat, first for several days with improvement of the food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	 Then shave the head of the patient and then cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the aforementioned method, and with another cautery on the occiput of his head, and over each corner of the head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	 And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then apply a pointed cautery to them with the tools I have mentioned earlier, ensuring that there is partial paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	 And perform an olive-sized cautery as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	 But if the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery in this manner.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	 On the Cauterization for Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	 When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and thick flame, then apply the cautery with partial paralysis as mentioned before.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	 And if the cause of melancholy is a declining superfluity that leads to melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them water to cleanse their brain as described in the previous division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	 And shave the patient's head, and fashion a modest tonsure on them over the crown, and place that in the middle of their head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	 And let the patient be seated upright, and be supported from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	 And apply a liniment; and it is more fitting to use old ewe's fat.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	 Based on the given context and the similarity to Latin and Romance languages, here's a possible translation of the sentence:
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	 And then take that [instrument] and place it in the middle of their head, and pierce them so they are penetrated.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	 And do this with the patient for one whole week, with the other good regimen until they are healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that area making small points according to their strength, as long as you have a hand with a cautery arranged in this way: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain evenly.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	 And then wrap that area with a bandage soaked in vinegar or goose grease.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter XII
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	 About the cauterization of water descending into the eye
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	 When you have determined the beginning of water in the eye by the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses their head, and protect them from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	 And make them soak in a warm bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	 Then command him to shave his head and cauterize that [area] with a cautery in the middle of his head; then cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if the beginning is the issuing of water from both eyes, or with one stroke if it is the beginning of water from one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	 And beware of blood flow when cauterized; and if you see blood flowing from them, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	 And I come with knowledge in the extraction of arrows and in the absorption of those and caution against blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	 And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck between two bones using two very sharp cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter .xiii.  (The translation of "Capitol" is "Chapter")
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	 About cauterizing old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	 When the tears of the eyes are old and persistent, and through the veins and arteries that are in the most visible part of the head outside, and it is verified that this is an excess of phlegmatic humors, then cauterize with a cautery as we have mentioned in the beginning chapter about water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on the neck between the temples, and with two cauteries on the neck between the bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	 And if you need an addition, then cauterize that along the entire length of the tail of the eye on the edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	 This line indicates that what follows is the 14th chapter or section of the text. In modern terms, it would be similar to writing "Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	 This translates to:
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	 When you treat that person with the remedy we mentioned in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare and give the patient to drink cock's combs for three nights; and then shave their head, and cauterize them with a pointed cautery, half with olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	 And then cauterize that person with a rosemary-infused cautery, using two cauteries on the two eyebrows just below the hairline, a little.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	 And be careful not to burn that area.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	 And this is how you make the rosemary-infused cautery:
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter XV
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	 About making an eye ointment to soften the eyelids.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery made from this lunar cautery; and this is how you make it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	 And if you do so, cauterize that (area) on the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in every part, and they should be long from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	 And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	 And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that one third of the eyelid is burnt.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	 When the eyelashes turn inward and puncture the eye, use cautery on the eyelid.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	 When the eyelashes of the eye turn inward so that they puncture the eye, cautery is performed in two ways: either by burning or with a caustic medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	 If you are cauterizing with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to let their eyelashes grow long and curled like those who pluck them; and if you puncture that [area], then strengthen his eyes with a bandage so that it is not worsened until the eyelashes have grown back. ething.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	 Therefore, once they have grown and curled, place the patient's head on your lap, and then make a sign over the eyelids of his eyes with a tent, in the shape of a holly leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be near the eyelashes.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	 Then place a cotton swab dipped in egg white or a paste of lentils over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	 Then ignite the cautery, which should be shaped like this.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	 It appears that the provided text is in an old form of Catalan, which shares similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Let's translate the given sentence line by line into English:
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	 E levanta tu mano y déjalo así durante tres días, y luego coloca un cojín sobre él con una venda hasta que se cure la herida.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	 But if it returns through the hairs for any reason and the eyelid is softened, then do the cauterization again on that spot just as you did originally.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	 But if the hairs are on the edge of the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural place and healed, so that the hairs do not touch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 But apply the cauterizing medication as a combustible agent; this is what you should command the patient to do: let him pluck the hairs until they are lengthened and healed, and then make a bandage of cloth in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	 And then take a known soap and some live coals, and if you don't have that, then mix those substances well together, and do this quickly so it doesn't get cold; and then spread some of that water over the bandage which is made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place that on one eye or both; and place under the eye a pad soaked in egg white, and let the patient's head be in your hands.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	 And place the poultice over the medicine and press it lightly, without removing it until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like fire in him.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	 And as soon as he perceives that he has found the bite, then remove the medicine and replace it with a clean cloth; and when the bite ceases, then reapply the medicine and wash the wound with water; and consider whether you see the eyelid lifted as if washed by constriction with fire or incision, for then it is well; and if not, return the medicine to the place where it has not been applied, and do not remove it until your operation is complete and the wound is healed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	 Then place a pad over the area with a border until the swelling of the edema is gone, and then treat it with a healing ointment or another one until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	 And it is necessary for you, in your operation, to keep watch with great diligence that no part of the medicine falls into the wound; and if the eyelid after some days becomes softened, and any hairs fall into the wound, then reapply your medicine to the place where the eyelid is softened, just as you did at first, and then clean it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 And this is the shape of the myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	 And know that human feet are differentiated by size and smallness, and therefore your contraction is made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	 And the path to correctness will not be hidden from those who study this art.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter XVII
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	 Of the cauterization of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the foot.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	 When you treat a fistula with the water we mentioned in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not work, then you must cauterize it in this manner: order the patient to place his head on your shoulder, and let another servant hold his head between your hands in such a way that it is not moved or shaken by his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	 And then place cotton soaked in egg white or crushed pepper on the patient's foot.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And then ignite the cautery, which has this shape:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	 The one that is convex, in the shape of a reed or vulture feather, with which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	 And if you want it to be, let it penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	 And if you wish it to be so as intended.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	 But nevertheless, that which is hollow is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	 Then promptly press the fistula if it is open, and from it let out sanies and dry it up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	 And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	 Then place over it the pointed cautery which is well lit, and with that your hand a little behind the point of the cautery near the nose, so that your hand does not err or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery in the gray matter of the brain and corrupt it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	 And thus if at the beginning of your cautery it goes into the bone, good; and if not, then iterate the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and leave it so for three days, and then place over that spot a bandage and surround it with drying ointment until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	 But if eleven days have passed and it is not healed, then place over it a sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and shave it as necessary according to its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	 And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which some earlier people said: go to the place of the fistula and open it up, and then immediately place in that fissure a thin thread of which the shape is like this: And pour into it one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand with the thread with good control, so that the patient is not disturbed because the melted lead does not reach the head of that; and it is necessary to place over the head of the patient a spot covered in egg white or water, because lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Capitol .xviii.	 "Chapter XVIII
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	 "On Cauterizing the Foot's Wound.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	 "Many times these splits occur in the lips, and mostly in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	 "Therefore, when you treat those splits with the water we mentioned in the sections, and if your treatment is not effective, then burn with a small pointed cautery like this:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	 "And let its concavity be according to the subtlety of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	 "Then place this [cautery] carefully in those splits until the heat of the cautery reaches the depth of the splits.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	 "And then treat it with plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	 "Chapter XIX
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	 "On Cauterizing a Fistula in the Mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 "When an abscess forms at the root of the uvula or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, and it becomes swollen, and then bursts, and becomes chronic, and foul pus exudes, creating a fistula, and if you treat it and the treatment is not effective, then you should burn with a cautery according to the size that fits into the fistula. And place this burning cautery in the hole of the fistula, and keep your hand there until the heated iron reaches its depth; at the end of this process, do so one or two times; and then treat it with the water we mentioned for treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	 And therefore, if the wound is cut open and heals, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to uncover the area and remove the rotten bones according to their chapter.
Capitol .xx.	 Chapter 20
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	 On the Cauterization of Teeth and the Softening of Veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	 When the veins are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines but they do not improve, then place the head of the patient on your knees, and quickly heat the cautery in the shape that will be shown to you later, so that you place the small point on the tooth and immediately insert the heated cautery into it, holding your hand a little inside so that the patient feels the heat of the fire directly at the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	 Then lift your hand and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	 Then have the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, then stop it, because the decayed tooth is closed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupting moisture is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	 This phrase appears to describe a medical procedure involving tooth pain. A literal translation could be:
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	 When tooth pain is caused by cold, or there is a splinter or worm, and you do not treat it with medicine, then cauterize the area according to two methods: either cauterize with a cow's hoof or cauterize with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	 Cauterizing with a hoof is done by taking a cow's hoof and burning it in the embers of iron, then take cotton and wrap it around the end of the tent peg, then immerse that wrapped tent peg in the burned hoof, and place it on the painful tooth quickly until it becomes cold.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	 And then repeat this process several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	 And if you wish, dip wool or cotton in the aforementioned hoof, and place it on the painful tooth, and place a red-hot iron on top of that until the iron reaches the bottom of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	 However, the cauterization with fire is that you pay attention to the needle of iron or steel, and it should have some thickness in its center so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	 And then heat the cautery to the desired shape, and place it on the tooth and hold it with your hand until the cautery is cooled; and do this several times because the pain will diminish either that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	 And it is necessary that, by pressing with that cautery, the patient fills his mouth with good drink and holds it for an hour, and then spits it out; and this is the method of cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	 And you should cauterize with whatever extreme measures are possible for you to do.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	 And this is the method of using the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter XXII
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	 On the Cauterization of Prolapse
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	 When prolapse is caused by phlegm and cold humors and does not respond to digestion through medicines, and you wish to achieve mild digestion of these [humors], then heat the cautery with the following shape: it has two openings, one for the smoke to exit, and place the burning end on the prolapse once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the core of the prolapse.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	 And if the prolapse is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the prolapse, and leave it for three days, and then apply a poultice soaked in wine until what has been burned by the fire is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat it with ointments, compresses, and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	 And the shape of the needle or the cautery should be conveyed in this manner.
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	 On cauterizing raw vocal cords and constricting the airway.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	 When moisture comes upon the canal of the lung, especially when it is accompanied by coldness of the pleura, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at first with purgative medicines, and afterwards cauterize that part of the throat where it is pressed.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	 And be careful not to reach the throat with the cautery or burn too much of his windpipe.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	 And cauterize that part with another cautery at the joint of the neck in his last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	 And let the cautery be clamped as was done previously.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 And afterwards care for that part with the water mentioned before until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 Chapter 24
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	 On cauterizing illnesses of the lung and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	 When cough and lung illness are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or phlegm and it is an old ailment, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the depressed, fleshy places; and with another cautery in the middle of the sole between two small bones; and let the cauteries be clamped as was done previously.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	 If you wish, let your cautery point be with the pointed instrument called "punctum," the form of which should precede in the treatment of earache pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 And let the points be placed within those; and then cure that with water that has been used previously until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	 And the pointed instrument should have three tips, for cautery is done with it: in one session you can make three cauteries according to this form.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	 On the cautery of the little finger, which is called the "titillus.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	 When the little finger is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and does not remain in place upon its return, you must reduce the dislocation until it returns to normal. Then, by a small movement, it should be dislocated back into place, as we have shown. Therefore, firstly, you must reduce the dislocation. And then turn the patient onto their stomach or side; and then raise the heel which is in the inner part of the little finger upwards with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inward.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And then heat the pointed instrument that has two points; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	 And then cauterize the cord until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cautery will be that of four holes made by the cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And let it be subtle according to the quantity of pain; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	 And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, and because there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	 And then place some fine salt on the cauteries, and then make sure the patient remains still, and that the limb is not moved for any time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	 And if the dislocation is above and it is done late, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed cautery or with several pointed cauteries, because the joint is strengthened and the moisture is dried out and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter 26
De cauterizacio del stomac.	 Of stomach cautery.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	 When coldness and moisture increase in the stomach until it is expelled from its natural place and many raumases appear on it, and if you continue with the same treatment methods and they do not help, then it is necessary to lay the patient on their back, extend their hands and feet, and then cauterize them with three cauteries: one cautery below the feet for the length of a finger with a pointed cautery, and with two cauteries below each rib of the first cautery, so that the figure of the cautery becomes triangular; and let those which are not adjusted cause pustules.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	 And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the heel.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	 And let the shape of the cautery be according to this figure without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this figure; and this should be a cautery in the form of a circle according to this figure:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	 And the stomach should be cauterized with points at those places where you fear this cautery may have effects: and it is that you know about the stomach with a tentative point according to the amount that you want, and then cauterize that area with a cautery in the points; and then treat that area with the previously mentioned treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	 On the cauterization of the frozen foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	 When the foot experiences pain due to coldness, moisture, or excessive windiness such that its normal condition is disturbed by an excessive outflow, and if you have treated the patient with the water we mentioned before, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back with their head elevated. Examine with a tentative cautery three times in this manner and in this quantity, placing them on the foot below the hypochondriac region, which corresponds to the male recumbent position.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	 And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	 And do not press the cauterizing iron too much.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	 And if the amount of water that is needed is equal to half the thickness of a rope, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit down, having already spread out their clothes, and raised their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	 And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	 And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a lancet-like cautery, when you are skillful and prudent in this art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	 And be careful not to cauterize too deeply, and let the thickness of the entire rope be considered so that the whole body is cauterized and reaches into the intestines, because the rope here is thin; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter .28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	 On the incision of an abscess on the foot with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	 When you want to incise or open an abscess on the foot and you wish to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will experience heaviness and pain without acuteness.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	 And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with pain being severe and sometimes exhausting doctors' efforts to cure it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	 Therefore, it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back; then mark the location of the abscess with a tent; and then ignite the cautery that resembles a razor, whose shape was shown on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	 And cauterize with it and burn until all the pus is consumed, until it reaches the depths, until it begins to bleed.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	 Then treat that one for the healing of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	 And it is not necessary to use this form of cautery except that which has been prolonged in the art of medicine and with which most sick people are familiar; however, some have dared to experiment with this procedure, but nevertheless we must leave that to you, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter XXIX
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	 Of the Cautery of Pleurisy
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	 The ancients used to say that the cautery of the pleura caused by cold humors should be done in this manner: take a long, dry reed from the family of rushes, one that is pointed and thin, like the size of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	 And then submerge that (the area) in oil and heat it over the fire, and then cauterize that place with a cautery between the continuation of the clavicle and the neck; and with two small cauteries below, one slightly inclined towards the area under the chin, and with two cauteries on the area that is slightly inclined between the fifth rib and the twelfth, inclined a little towards the back areas; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries in the back areas; and with one cautery in the place that is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on the sides of the feet, below the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	 And it should not be that you grasp the cautery with your hand, but rather it should be in the open area of the sheath in plain view.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	 And some ancient ones said that some of the men who use an iron cautery similar to a ray and fiery in that area, and they put it in that place which is between the ribs, until it reaches with that to that abscess and the pus is expelled, as we have said about the abscess of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	 In this perforation with a cautery, there is fear because one can die immediately if it happens in the place of a fistula that does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	 Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	 On the cauterization of the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	 When you treat the illness of the spleen with the water we have mentioned in the treatment section and your treatment does not work, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are correct. One of these is that you should make three or four cautery marks along the length of the spleen, following the pattern of the cautery marks on the liver, whose figure has been shown previously.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	 And let there be a distance between each cautery mark of about the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the method of cauterization should be the same as we have said for the liver, likewise.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	 And do not press your hand with the cautery; and let the patient be lying on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	 And another method of cauterization is that you heat the cautery with two outpourings, which we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the rib that is located on the left side of the spleen where the patient is lying.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	 Here's a possible translation of the sentence:
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	 And then insert both needles, carefully, into that space where with those you will penetrate the vein of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	 And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries have been made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	 And if you see [that there are still issues], cauterize again with a cautery having three needles.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	 And then you care for the cauteries because they have been in place for too many days, for it is more convenient than the other previously mentioned causes of the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter .31
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	 On the Cauterization of Dropsy Patients
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	 Do not perform cautery on dropsy patients, but rather on those who are properly dried out.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	 When you care for the dropsy patient using the methods of treatment that we have described in the division, and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary that he be cauterized with four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, and another on the spleen, and another on the liver, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	 And let the depth of the cauterization be appropriate to the thickness of the vein.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	 And then lay down the open cautery so that you may hold the arm for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	 And do not evacuate the patient of their treatment immediately after cautery with the water that is needed so that two intentions are added to them, and then quickly help them with healing aid.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	 The shape of the cautery with which the stomach is cauterized should be pointed like the one mentioned before, and it should be oval in shape for cauterizing the back as described previously.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter .xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	 On the Cautery of Feet and Joints.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	 When the feet are swollen from dropsy and filled with serous fluid, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger, and lift your hand with the cautery and do not turn it; and then lift your hand, and do not bring it all the way down, because the serous fluid will reflux.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	 The cautery should be done in this way: Then make two cauteries on both joints, and each joint should have a cautery done with the tip of the knife-shaped cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	 And the cautery should be according to the length of the joint: one above the knuckle and the other below the middle of the joint; and on each joint, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	 And leave the wound open without treatment for a long time so that some water flows out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	 Then treat them with those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter XXXIII
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	 Of the Cauterization of the Body's Abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	 When the body's abdomen is affected by cold and humidity, which weaken the powers (virtues) such as the digestive and retentive powers located in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated with the various methods of treatment mentioned earlier. And sometimes the patient will suffer from an excess of power, at which point cauterize him with a large cautery on his stomach, as previously described for stomach cauterization, along with a circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel, as well as a subtle needle cautery; or alternatively, a cautery on the skin over a large vein, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	 And if the humidities are excessive and the patient cannot tolerate them, then cauterize him on the bladder and intestines, and firmly place two cauteries on the stomach near the groin area, as this is a perfect cure from which there will be no error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 The text you provided appears to be in an old Romance language, possibly Occitan or another variant of Old French. Here's a translation attempt for "Capitol .xxxiv.":
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	 About the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	 When there are old hemorrhoids due to thick cold humors or corrupt moisture, and they have been treated with the water we mentioned in the division but do not show signs of healing, then cauterize with three cauteries below the small of the back, placing them in a small triangular shape, and also cauterize above the navel with two incisions.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	 And if you suspect that his stomach is cold and his food is not digested, and his face often appears pale, then cauterize the corresponding point on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the spleen, and with another cautery on his gallbladder with a pointed cautery. Leave the cauteries open for some time and then treat him until he is cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter .xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	 Concerning the cauterization of tumors near their abscess.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	 When you cut into a tumor, then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	 Then insert the heated cautery into the cut tumor, and continue until you reach the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And do this one or two times, because if the veins are too large, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and then treat them with water from the ointments until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	 And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any part of the body, it is more useful as a remedy.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 Chapter .xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	 Of the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	 When nature does not obey the work described in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, let him be healed with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	 Therefore, when some vein has a fistula occurring naturally within it and is chronic, with corrupt blood and humors flowing out, then the most worthy thing to do is to probe it with a subtle probe, and then recognize the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	 Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	 And then insert the heated cautery into this fistula according to the quantity in which you inserted the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 And repeat with the cautery on that spot until those corrupt bodies are burned once or twice or three times, according to your need. xspace
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	 And be careful not to cause burning of the nerves or veins; or if there is a fistula in the bladder or intestines, then avoid those areas; and do this only when the fistula is in fleshy and soft parts where it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 And then cure the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	 And if the area is sealed and the materials removed from it remain that way for a long time, then know that it has been completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	 And if the materials are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or that its bone has become rotten, or because of those causes which will cause a recurrence in that area.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter XXXVII
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	 On the Cautery of Hemorrhoids.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	 When hemorrhoids cause pain due to cold or great heat, and for this reason the patient's anus is numb, then it is necessary to cauterize those (hemorrhoids) on the anus with a hot cautery on each hemorrhoid, using a needle of which you will need the reminder.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	 And strongly cauterize with the second one a little deeper, so that there will be three lined cauteries, and thus they will be more useful in helping.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 The translation of "Capitol .xxxviii." is "Chapter 38".
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	 "On Cauterization of the Bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	 "When there is weakness and softening of the bladder due to cold and moisture, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize him in the lower part of the abdomen below the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, using a hot iron on the right side and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	 "And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the patient's navel; and cauterize him also in the lower back with a hot iron, or with two irons if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	 "And let the cauteries be done with a pointed iron as needed.
Capitol .xxxix.	 "Chapter 39
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	 "On Cauterization of the Uterus.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	 "When the uterus is affected by cold and moisture, making intercourse difficult, menstrual flow becomes corrupt, delayed, or painful, then the area should be cauterized with three irons around the navel, as we have said in the case of bladder cautery; and also cauterize below the back with one iron, or two if necessary, and let the cauteries be done with a pointed iron.
Capitol .xl.	 It seems like the text you provided is starting with "Capitol .xl." which translates to "Chapter 40" in English. This indicates that the text is divided into chapters, and this particular section is the 40th chapter of the medieval medical treatise. Without additional context or content from the next lines, I can't provide a more detailed translation, but based on the pattern you've shown, each line would be translated sequentially as it appears. If you have more text to translate, please continue, and I will assist you with each line accordingly.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	 Of the cauterization for ankle dislocation.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	 When mucus is infused in the part of the ankle and this causes its displacement from its place, a sign of this is that one leg appears longer than the other when compared to each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	 And the place of the dislocation is found in it which is swollen.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	 Therefore, you should cauterize the patient over the affected part of the ankle with a circular iron, because you will have a sign with the probe in the circle of the place as it is turned around, and so that the place falls exactly in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	 And let the iron be of the same form as in the cautery of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	 And if this iron is not available to you, then cauterize with three irons, using a large olive-sized iron.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And let the cautery be done according to the thickness of the entire tendon; and then care for it until it heals.
Capitol .xli.	 Chapter 41
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	 On Cauterizing the Sciatic Vein
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	 When pain occurs in the ankle area due to cold and dampness, the patient is treated with the water we have mentioned before, and no other remedy should be given, for this treatment is ancient. Therefore, you must first purge the patient of gross humors using either fetid pills or artificial pills; then cauterize the affected area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	 There are two methods for cauterizing in this case: cauterization with burning medicines or cauterization with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	 According to two well-known methods, one of which involves cauterizing the affected area of the ankle with three triangular cauteries like this; and you should make a good depth with them.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	 The space between each cautery should be the width of the tip of your finger, whether you use an olive-sized or larger cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	 However, sometimes the cauteries should be placed halfway up the shin, because there are four cauteries in total.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	 And if you wish, you can also cauterize with the circular shape used in the treatment of ankle dislocation, ensuring that the circle is continuous and burns the entire circumference.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	 "And this is the manner of cauterization in hernia when the pain adheres to the ring and does not extend into the scrotum.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	 "But if the pain extends into the scrotum, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the scrotum at the place where you direct the patient, which is the pain; and with one cautery on the testicle for four times a little above the posterior part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	 "And if you use a lancet for cauterization, then let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the scrotal skin.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	 "And if the patient directs that the pain has extended to the place near the testicles, then cauterize it here where he directs with a cautery for three or four times, or more if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	 "And if the patient directs that the pain is below the anus towards the scrotum, then cauterize it here with a lancet.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	 "And be careful in all cauterization that you do not burn too deeply with the lancet so as to damage nerves or large blood vessels, and thus cause harm or injury to the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	 "And I have seen one or two of those who cauterized on the testicle and burned too deeply, and the foot became swollen until the tumor reached the foot, and it was perforated and completely corrupted.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	 And then there is a sudden release of the stomach, and this is death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	 And if the pain occurs in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	 And the wise men said in the cauterization of water, this is the manner: make a circle of iron, the circumference of which is half a palm; and its holes should be according to the thickness of a finger or less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And inside that circle there should be another third [circle]; and the space between them should be the width of a thumb; and those circles should be open on two sides; and the length of those sticks should be one thumb or two thumbs, and make the edges of iron decently finished on the circles; and this is its shape:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	 Then let it be heated in the fire until it becomes red and starts to throw sparks, and then place it on the watery part, with the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	 And so cauterize that with three round cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then leave that for three days; and then dress that with a poultice, leaving the wound open for several days; and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	 Certainly! Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	 It appears that this text is written in a language that combines elements from Latin and Romance languages, possibly a form of medieval Occitan or Catalan. Let's translate the given sentence line by line:
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	 Certainly! Let's translate the text line by line:
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	 And if the space that is between each quantity of the thickness of the said [part]; and they are opened below and above, and they are such that they contain each other according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	 And then place the patient lying on their side, and press your hand on the affected area; and then take some hot water and pour it between two basins (or containers), and let the heat of that water increase gradually, and hold it for about an hour, so that the patient endures the burning and scalding — because this remedy burns like fire — until the burning ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	 And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away all the hot water from the affected area with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	 And then let it be for three days and place a border over it until the blackness of the burn fades away, and let that be for some days, and scabies will run off from there; this is for aid.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat it with ointments until it heals.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	 And if the pain extends into the thigh or the leg, make for him a statue that contains water according to what is done on the hand likewise.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	 This is the method of applying hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	 Recipe of lime and eggshells, both finely crushed together in equal parts, and strain them to place in a new vessel, through which the mixture can be poured little by little, according to the amount that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	 Then place another vessel underneath the first one, and pour over it lime and eggshells double their volume of warm water, which covers them by about a finger's width. After compressing them well with your hand, let the sharp water from above drain into the lower vessel through the hole.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	 Then immediately adjust all that water and pour it over another batch of warm eggshells and fresh lime, because at this point it will have a very strong acidity, which is used in many medical operations and for cauterizing other limbs, as it has the effect of fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	 And so with some medicines, such as honey, vinegar and soap, which should be mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	 And Galen recounts the operation and treatment of a man from antiquity with which pain of water and sciatica is cured, and he said that no other treatment was needed, because it is cured once, as he recounted, for when he entered the bath, he came out healthy.  />
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	 And it is that a piece of fresh verbena be taken; and if verbena is not found, then take a recent fig; and let it be chopped with a little gray [salt] and placed on the ankle where the pain is, or in the cavity, or in the thigh, and bind it.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	 And let it be left for the duration of three hours or for as long as the patient feels relief from the application.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	 And then place that [patient] in a bath and when their body is reddened, immerse them in the cold water, for the pain will cease and they will be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	 And know that it is not necessary to use cautery with these remedies except for the purpose of purging the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	 However, Hippocrates said that when the varicose vein of a goat is cauterized, it benefits him more; and the cautery should be used in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the soles.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	 And then take dry goat dung and inflame it with fire until it becomes charcoal; and then place that on the wool and press it until it is spread out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	 And repeat this action, and do not stop doing so until the feeling of biting reaches into the ankle and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	 And this manner of cautery is called "cautery of cows.
Capitol .xlii.	 Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	 On the Cauterization for Back Pain
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	 Sometimes pain in the back is due to many causes, such as falling or striking, or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, due to the infiltration of cold and wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	 Cautery is only effective in this particular type caused by the infiltration of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	 Therefore, first evacuate the patient with purgative pills and similar to them, which should be made on the back where the pain is located in three lines according to its size, as each line has ten cauteries or more, according to the patient's tolerance and strength.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	 And the cautery should be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	 And if you wish, cauterize with three or four with a median-sized nail cautery in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	 Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	 About cauterization at the beginning of jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	 Many observations indicate that this illness affects mainly small children; and a sign of its onset in children is that they experience convulsions or movements in the upper extremities during sleep.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	 And you will find in the last vertebra of the back and in the nape of the neck that it begins to protrude over the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	 And therefore when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery like this:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	 so that the cautery covers all parts of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	 And if you wish, you can also cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three times.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	 And let the points be close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	 And then carefully treat the area until it is healed as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	 But be careful not to apply cautery in cases of jaundice caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	 Chapter XLIV
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	 On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, doctors typically call this gout.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	 And thus, when gout is treated with care due to coldness and the pains are not relieved, then apply cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	 Therefore, you cauterize that appropriate location around the joint of the foot with multiple cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And it should be cauterized in this way:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	 And if the pain spreads into the toes or other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauteries in total, using this type of cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	 And if multiple cauteries are necessary, then cauterize the area, but do not press too hard with the cautery; just let the tip touch the skin.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	 And if the pain spreads to the toe and the foot, then administer the cautery as described in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	 And if the pain is only in the hands and is called "suagra", then prick around the fingernails like this: prick along these two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	 And if pain remains in the fingers, then prick around the fingernails of each finger and at the base of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	 And if the pain worsens after several days in the shoulders or muscles, then cauterize each of those parts with fire from the assistant's tool.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	 And do not evacuate the patient of good diet and reception of medicine, because if good diet is maintained and the humor is evacuated with this cautery, he will be healed, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	 Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	 On the Cauterization of Wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	 When there is a rupture in the belly and the intestines protrude through the wound, as if they are coming out, then you should order the patient to abstain from food on that day and use lenitive remedies so that the opening in their belly does not increase.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	 Then follow the patient and hold them with your hands on their back, and command him to keep his breath until the intestine or the bowel is expelled or appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	 Then return with these words and instructions, attempting to close the wound on the bones of the pelvis, marking the end of which should resemble half a circle in the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Then heat the cautery which has this shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	 "Until it is completely red and sparkling.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	 And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, with another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	 And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand steadily holding the cautery upright, and apply heat until you reach the bones of the little toe in the middle of the foot; and repeat this action one more time if you have not achieved it in the first application.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	 And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during your cauterization, to ensure that you do not burn the intestine and cause death or other serious illness in the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	 And know that if with the cautery you do not touch the bones, your operation will be ineffective.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	 And it is important that the cautery for children should be fine according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	 Then care for the cauterized area for three days with a bandage until the char of the fire is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for him with other ointments until he is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	 And the patient should lie on their back for 40 days, until the area and the wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	 And it is necessary to adjust the patient's diet according to the length of time they are being treated, so as not to strain their stomach and prevent the intestines from coming out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	 And then when you want to remove it after about 40 days, administer a well-prepared poultice, and keep it for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	 And he should abstain from work and excessive eating and drinking, and from loud voices, for when following this complete regimen of healing, he will certainly be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	 And I will describe the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if you do not want them to stop, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; let what is excreted from the gut also be like the third part of it. And then care for him as we have said, and it will not close.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	 And some of the earlier ones say that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked with a tenth:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	 And a line is placed that runs through the length of the back, above the rupture, and another line below it; and you place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	 Chapter XLVI
De cauterizacio de torcio.	 On Cauterizing Hernia
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	 When pain in certain members persists due to injury or bruising and this pain endures for a long time and you do not heal it with medicine, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	 And let the cautery be adapted to each member according to its size and smallness, thickness and thinness, and the location of the hernia and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	 Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for it is customary that these pains are transmitted from one member to another nearby, so you must capture them with a cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter XLVII
De cauterizacio de lepra.	 On Cauterizing Leprosy
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	 Some lepers are greatly helped by cautery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	 And therefore when you wish to cauterize that area, consider if the leprosy is common and if it has been treated with the water we mentioned in the division, and neither say nor do this. Be mindful over the patient that corruption may spread throughout their body and entire complexion. In such a case, cauterize that area on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, the second lower than the first, at the hairline; and two on the temples; and one at the back, on the nape or occiput.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	 And finish with your hand and the cauteries a little deeper, pressing into the bone to make a slight indentation, which will displace the scabs and thereby alleviate the expulsion of thick vapors from him; and cauterize on the spleen as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	 And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize with those cauteries which we have mentioned on the head; and with one cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both cheeks, and two cauteries on the two shoulder blades of the neck, and six cauteries on the shoulder blades of the back, and one large one on the shoulder blades near the spine, and one on the spine, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the heels and one on each heel, and two on the elbows, and two on the wrists, and two on the knuckles of the hands, and cauterize that on all the joints of the fingers of the hands and the feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the soles of his feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	 And be careful of the nerves that are on the sole [of the foot], so that you do not burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	 And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the knee and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the chest.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	 And know that the more precisely you apply the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cauterization itself, just as his servants do, because his body is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	 And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints, as has been established by the types of surgical instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Then cure the cauterized area with flour mixed with honey and with other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	 Chapter XLVIII
De cauterizacio de stupor.	 On Cauterization for Stroke
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	 When a member is stunned or numb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member, whether large or small.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	 And let your cautery enter a little into the thickness of the tendon.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for him with ointment until he is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	 And sometimes the area is cauterized where there are numbness or tingling sensations in the hands and feet, in the vertebrae of the back, around the eyes of the nerves that govern those limbs, and the numbness is removed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	 But do not attempt this unless one is wise in the anatomy of the limbs and the course of the nerves that move throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	 Chapter XLIX
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	 About the cauterization of blisters that have formed.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	 When a blister is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you cauterize that area with a pointed cautery for a short period of time according to the size of the head of the blister, until the whiteness and color of it are removed and its color has changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for it with a poultice made of barley flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and arnica leaves, and pigeon blood or swallow blood, each being one part, all mixed together. Then a cloth is soaked in this mixture and placed on the area until it heals.
Capitol .l.	 "Capitulum Primus" or "Chapter One". This phrase indicates that we are starting with the first section of the medical treatise.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	 "About the Cauterization of Cancer." This sentence is likely the title of Chapter One, discussing the medieval medical treatment for cancer through the use of cautery.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	 "When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize the area with a circular cautery around its circumference in such a way that it is completely burned." This sentence provides instructions on how to treat cancer using cauterization in medieval medicine.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	 "And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the affected area; but I have not seen this done, because I fear it might cause an ulceration, and indeed I have seen this happen on several occasions." This sentence expresses a differing opinion on how to apply the cautery, highlighting potential risks and personal observations.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	 "And it is more appropriate that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circle, as we have said, or with many small cauteries." This sentence reinforces the initial advice on how to apply the cautery for treating cancer.
Capitol .li.	 "Chapter Two
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	 "About the Cauterization of Ablepsia (a condition causing blindness)." This sentence introduces Chapter Two, which focuses on treating ablepsia using cautery in medieval medical practices.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	 "When some ablepsia is delayed in healing, and this is due to an excess of humor causing it, or because the patient's condition is poor, being old and frail with little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten its healing; then cauterize around it with many small points; and then leave it alone, as it will hasten in healing." This sentence describes how to treat delayed healing of ablepsia using cautery.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	 If you wish to perform perforation on the patient with a cautery, then heat up the cautery, whose shape is like this: and place it in the middle of the abdomen until the needle penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you place the cautery in that area which is lower, in order to relieve the body of the arm; and then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	 Chapter .52
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	 About cauterization of ulcers.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	 An ulcer is a corruption moving through the body, which corrupts it like fire consuming dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	 Therefore, if you see an ulcer in a place suitable for cautery with fire, then heat up the points of iron needles, and make them large or small according to what is suitable for that location where the ulcer is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	 And then cauterize it from all sides until you have eradicated all corruption and nothing of it remains.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	 And then leave it for three days, and place on the cauterized areas a dressing soaked in oil mixed with honey until all scabs are removed and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	 And then treat it with a flesh-regenerating ointment.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	 Certainly! Here's the translation of the provided sentence:
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	 And sometimes it is treated with sharp medicine, because that is considered half of a cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	 But however, the cautery with fire is of more gentle help.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	 And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you have difficulty with him.
Capitol .liii.	 Chapter 33
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	 Of the cauterization of closures and other similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	 Many times it is seen in the feet of those suffering from pain that it is called a closure, and it is caused by a large, blunt object entering the foot; and these are cauterized in two ways, that is, with fire and with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	 But the cautery with fire is done by making the cauterizing instrument concave like a vulture's beak, which should be made of iron according to the size of the closure on every side, and it should be of fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	 And then place that heated instrument on the closure, and then rotate your hand with the cauterizer around the circumference of the closure until the cauterizer reaches the depth of the closure.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	 And leave it there for three days until it begins to sprout hairs. ↑
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	 And then apply a plaster made of crushed mallow and salt on the affected area, and leave the plaster there overnight, because this will help to remove the cause of the issue.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat the area with an ointment made from fresh meat until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	 And if the condition does not improve and more swellings appear on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you should administer cautery with water to those areas. Take a tube made of bronze or iron or the feather of a vulture, and place it over the nail; then pour into the tube a small amount of hot water, and hold your hand steady, and rotate the tube with the pressure of your hand all around, and press the edge of the tube against the root of the nail, and the hot water will find its way to the root of the nail; let the patient endure the burning sensation for an hour, then remove it, because the nail along with its root will be removed.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	 And do this for all of them, until you have treated all those present on the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	 And then treat those pus that are rooted out by the action of ointments which make the flesh swell.
Capitol .liiii.	 Chapter .43
De cauterizacio de tremor.	 On the Cautery for Tremors
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	 When someone has tremors due to injury in the nerves or due to fever caused by similar reasons, then it is necessary for you to cauterize that person with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, one between each vertebra; and with a cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, using olive oil as the cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	 And their tremors will subside and hasten the healing of their illness.
Capitol .lv.	 Chapter .55
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	 On the Cautery for Sudden Attacks on the Body
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	 When the body is suddenly struck by boils and there are pustules or openings that are formed from thick, corrupt matter; then at the beginning of their appearance, it is necessary for them to be cauterized over each opening with a subtle cautery made from myrtle wood, whose tip is extended with fire; or with a long surgical probe; or with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	 And sometimes it is cauterized immediately at the beginning of their eruption in this manner; and they are not feared, and the excess that causes them is dispersed, and one is healed from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	 "However, it is important that this be done after performing an evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	 "Chapter 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	 "On the Cauterization of Accidental Bleeding from Archer's Wounds.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	 "Archer's wounds are often accompanied by bleeding from the wound itself, or from the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and in such cases it is difficult to stop the flow.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	 "So when this happens to someone, you must immediately clamp the wound with your hand at the entrance of the arrow, and press firmly on it until the blood flow stops under your finger, so that it does not escape.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	 "Then place the olive-wood cauteries, both small and large, in the fire in sufficient quantity, and blow on them until they are red hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	 "Then take one of the cauteries, either small or large, according to the location and size of the wound where the artery has been severed. Quickly apply it to the vessel after removing your finger, and hold the cautery in place until the blood is burned and constricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	 "And if the blood continues to flow from the artery's opening when you remove your finger and take away the cautery, then take another one promptly from those prepared in the fire, and continue to do this repeatedly until the blood is constrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	 And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, lest another illness come upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	 And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those [cases] using the usual methods, especially if the artery is large, except by one of four ways: either with a pointed cautery as we have said, or with extraction if it has not been extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of the person are better burnt and the blood is restrained, or that it be tied with thread or bandage with strong tension, or that medicines which have the virtue of restricting blood be placed on it; and they should be strengthened with a cushion with moderate pressure.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	 But the one who administers moderate restriction with a bandage and strong tension with cloth or by changing the position of the causes of burning and similar [symptoms], should do so only later on.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	 But if this [method] is needed for someone and neither the doctor nor medicine is present, then use the aforementioned finger to occlude the orifice of that vein as we have said, and be aware that strong pressure should be applied to it until the blood is stopped from the main source of the wound, and the bandage should not be removed from the artery; and on top of the artery should be sprinkled with very cold water until the blood is frozen and thickened; and also be careful in case cautery or necessary medicine is needed.
Comensa la segonda partida.	 It begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	 Concerning incisions, perforations, fistulas, phlebotomy, wounds, and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	 These are the words of Al-Zahrawi.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	 We have already said in the first chapter all illnesses for which it is appropriate to use a heated cautery and combustive medicines, as well as their causes and necessary instruments with the forms of the cauteries; I have arranged the chapters from the top of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	 And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the one seeking relief may find it on what he has asked about.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	 And before I begin this, it is necessary, my son, that you understand that what is in this chapter is similar to what is in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	 And because it requires great caution, since in the operation that is in this chapter there are many viewings and evacuations with blood, through which life exists, you must be careful of splashing the vein or making an incision over the abscess, opening a fistula, cleansing the wound, extracting an arrow, cutting out a stone, and similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	 And of all these is accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	 And I warn you that upon you should not fall the thing in which there is doubt, because sometimes the case will happen to you with manners of men with very great sicknesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	 And of them there is some who will go with their sickness and it will be easy for him to die, and this because of the intensity of what he finds in his sickness, and because of the length of his sickness, and with the sickness is fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	 And among those is he who gives to you his wealth and property, while you expect health from him, but his sickness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	 Therefore, it is not suitable that you agree to what comes to you from those of this manner; and your caution should be greater than your avarice; and do not assume any cause except with proven knowledge which verifies the thing for you, and upon which there follows praiseworthy succession.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	 And use in the care of all your sick people prophecy and diagnosis of he who is turned toward health, for in him you will have help toward gaining fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	 O, sons, may God inspire in you His understanding and not remove your direction and protection, for that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	 And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauteries, from the care of the head to the feet, so that you may be relieved of that which you ask about and for which you need.
Capitol primier.	 Chapter one.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	 About the care of water that is contained in the heads of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	 Know that this illness very often happens to children at birth and when the nurse tightly swaddles the child's head without giving it enough space.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	 And sometimes it happens due to an unknown cause that is not understood.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	 But I have only seen this illness in children; and in all those that I have seen it has always resulted in death, and thus it seems to me to be a difficult task to treat them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	 And I have seen that a child whose head was full of water had his head always swollen to the point that he could not lift it over himself because of the size of his head, and moreover the humidity increased until he died.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	 And this moisture is either added between the tendon and the bone, or it is added below the bone onto the cartilage.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	 Because if the operation is in that case where the moisture is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then you should cut into the middle of the head with a slit in the latitude, and let the length of the slit be two nights so that it may drain the moisture, and this is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 And therefore if the moisture has increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two slits in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	 And if the moisture is below the bone, the sign of it is that you see the commissures of the head open on all sides and the water is squeezed out when you press that area with your hand from within and there is nothing hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 You should cut into the middle of the head with three slits in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	 Then extract all the moisture from the incision; and then strengthen the slits with cloths and cotton; and then pour over it water mixed with wine and oil for five days, and then remove the bandage and treat the wound with compresses and ointments, and bind the head firmly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	 Certainly! Let's translate the text line by line:
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	 And observe that you do not cut the artery, lest blood flow out and the patient dies from that bleeding along with the loss of fluid.
Capitol .ii.	 Chapter II
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	 On the incision of the arteries near the ears, which are called "hilasses.
Capitol segon.	 Chapter Two.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	 When there is cataracts or ruptures in the eyes or feet, and it is advanced, and medicines do not help, then the last resort for treatment in this case is the cutting of these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	 And therefore it is necessary that when you want to cut those [arteries], the patient raises his head, and immediately washes the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and immediately strengthens the patient's neck with some cloth; and immediately considers where the vein throbs; and presses the places of each on the places near the ears, and they are hidden in some men.  (Translation may not be perfect as the original text is quite fragmented)
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	 Then feel the artery with your thumb, and immediately cut each one with the blade of a sharp knife, the cut should go into the bone, and it should be done along the length of the neck.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	 And if you wish, insert the spatula under the artery and divide it into parts on top of it.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	 And let the length of the incision be twice the thickness of the skin, for when any vein is cut, the blood exits with a pulsating flow, which jumps out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	 But if the artery does not appear immediately, then you should measure from the ear the amount of space of three fingers, and then probe with a probe, and find the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	 And the amount of blood that should be drawn is approximately one-sixth of a measure, and it should not be taken from him more or less than this, and all this depends on the condition of the patient and the fullness of his artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 And then consider the wound, and if there remains any cause of inflammation on the bone, then cut it open to prevent a hot abscess from forming.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then strengthen the wound with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and then heal it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	 Chapter III
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	 About the removal of the arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	 When someone suffers from an ancient or sudden acute migraine due to humid acrimonious qualities in the temples or from an ancient severe headache similar to those, and it is treated with medical cures but does not improve, then we have recourse to these extraction methods: extracting arrows from the temples, or cauterizing them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	 The method of operation and extraction is as follows: the patient shaves the hair from their temples; and the person performing the procedure should observe the prominent arrow in the temple, which has been shown to you by its pulsation, although it remains hidden in most people due to the severity of the cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	 And if it is hidden from you, then the patient's neck should be stretched with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the arrow becomes clearly visible to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And then you take the instrument, the shape of which is as follows:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	 And then you peel the skin with it until you reach the arrow; and then pour oil on it and extract it piece by piece until you have removed it from the skin and discovered it completely from all its coverings.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	 If the artery is delicate, then wrap it with the tip of the onion, and then cut off a section of it according to the length by which its ends are extended and contracted. This will prevent blood flow, because if they are not cut, the blood will not rise completely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	 Then evacuate the blood for one to three cups.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	 And if the artery is large, then it is necessary for you to tie it in two places with double-strong silk or with long cords, and do not cut it until after the wound has healed, so that blood flow does not occur.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	 Then incise the excess that is between two ligatures; and do this at that time or soon after.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	 And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone using a cautery knife until its ends are incised, and this will serve as that same procedure.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	 And this is better done if the patient has a fever or is suffering from a hot condition, because cauterization helps to reduce dampness, and therefore it is better used in healing.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	 And it is also necessary for the extraction of the arteries that the place be well covered with cotton wool, and that appropriate powder be placed on it, and then it should be treated with dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and with compresses until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 And if while performing another task, blood flow from the wound occurs, then you should quickly restrict that blood flow, either with a pointed instrument or by filling the area with cotton, and press firmly until the bleeding is restricted.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	 And if none of the above options are available to you, then place your finger over the wound until the blood clots, and wash the area with very cold water until the bleeding stops, and hold it firmly as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	 And the easier method for removing a thorn from a wound is to cauterize the vein with this pointed instrument that has two prongs. After feeling both sides of the wound with your finger, place each prong on either side of the thorn, light them until they reach the bone and split the vein in two places, so that what is between the ends is elongated, as it may not be completely solidified by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	 And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	 And let the sharpness of the two prongs be equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	 However, if the sharpness of the two prongs is less than that of two needles, it is better, because if they are as sharp as two needles, they may cut the flesh too quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	 Therefore, when there is any swelling in those areas, heat from fire should be applied and the flesh should be slightly cut.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	 And this method is better than any other and easier as well.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	 And the space between two cottons should be equal to the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	 Chapter Four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	 On the treatment of bodies with acute and acidic tears in the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	 When there are acidic tears, and it is the body of those veins which are above the head outside, and you do not find any cause for medical treatment, sometimes the face of the patient turns red, and they feel a sensation on their forehead as if ants were walking, and their eyes are exhausted, so wet that even their eyelashes are limp, and the eyelids are scratched by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient physicians used this operation for the treatment of such cases, and they named this treatment "spassa.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	 And you order the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then you make three equally spaced incisions in the forehead according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	 And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: one fissure should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little less than the movement of the eyelids which are in the tear ducts, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	 And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two places, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	 And if the space of each incision is three fingers wide, adjust it accordingly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	 And if you have a sponge or dry cloths with which to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	 And then insert the spatula with two sharp tips, for this is how its incision should be made:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	 which is from the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	 Scrape out all the membrane that is between the two incisions above the bone, and then do this from the middle incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	 Then press on this spatula and insert it again into the first incision another time with another instrument which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	 Based on the context and similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, I'll attempt to translate the given sentence:
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	 Based on the context provided and the similarity to Latin and Romance languages, here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	 It seems like the text is discussing a medical procedure involving blood and frozen parts of the body. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	 And then place in each crack some old cloth, and place over those cracks powder mixed with wine, oil, and vinegar, and ensure that it does not become an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	 And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of hot water or tea, and then treat it with an ointment of basilicon oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	 Chapter .5
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	 Of the care for tear ducts and descending ulcers from within the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	 When someone has acute and persistent catarrh, and sometimes their eyes are exhausted and small, and the regulation of them is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and their hair falls out, and there is severe pain in the front of the head with consequent drainage, then you should know from these symptoms that the matter and catarrh come only from the small veins of the interior parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	 And the best treatment for this is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in the middle of it, a little above the latitut (and begin with the left temple incision towards the right temple; let the incision be into the bone; keep your hand away from the temples' sutures which are tough due to mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	 Based on the provided text and context, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 And then immediately apply powdered dust mixed with oil and vinegar, so that an abscess does not form.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	 And when you release it and see that the abscess has diminished, then heat the bone until flesh begins to grow on it, and then treat it with a drying remedy that promotes the growth of flesh. For example, if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, make a plaster from this mixture and apply it to these wounds to promote the growth of new flesh.
Capitol .vi.	 Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	 About the care for those who have a cold in their ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	 All causes that affect the ears are of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone, such as iron and glass; or it comes from a plant, such as sesame seeds or beans; or it is a liquid cause, such as water and sour wine and their like; or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	 And therefore, when a stone or another similar cause from those causes that do not fit or grow in the ear affects it, place the ear in the sun, and if you see the stone, then drip some oil of violets or cinnamon onto it, and then administer the extraction of it, make the person sneeze with condiments, and close the nostrils so that sneezing will not occur.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	 And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and extend the ear to its natural position above, because often it is dislocated with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if it is not dislocated, then administer an extraction of the same with the instrument called "fine gesti epicicarios," which looks like this:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	 And if it is not dislocated with the instrument, then it is good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a fine lancet of few doubles.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	 And if it is not dislocated with that, then make a tube of iron and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and close around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube remains open.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	 And then extract it with your own breath with strong suction, because often this is how it happens with what we have described.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	 But if it is not dislocated in this manner, then take some alum or some of the bird-lime used for catching birds, and place a small amount at the end of a reed, and then wrap around it a decent bandage.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	 And then insert that into the ear canal with ease, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	 And so if it is not forgotten for all the causes that we have mentioned, then you should cut [the affected part] before it becomes an abscess or cramp.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	 And the way to cut that is to first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein according to their strength and condition, then place a towel between your hands and tilt the ear towards the affected side, and make a small incision in the upper part of the ear where the grey matter is most prominent.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 And let the incision be in the shape of a crescent moon until it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then close the incision immediately, and care for it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	 And if the cause in the ear is one of those growths that grows and swells up, then administer treatment and removal of it; but if it does not obey your extraction, then take a subtle tweezers according to this manner:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	 The text appears to describe a medieval medical procedure involving an ear abscess. Here's a line-by-line translation into English:
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	 Sure, let's translate the sentence:
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	 Here's my attempt to translate the provided sentence into English:
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	 Translation:
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	 And already the water has been poured in such a way that you take some paper or cotton, and put one end of it in the ear, and extend the other end with fire until it is burnt at its base.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	 And then put in another cotton and do this several times until all the water is drained out, and use a straw as was mentioned above about the extracting stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	 But in the case of a foreign object entering that ear, if it is a small object, similar to this one, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large object which appears at the opening of the eardrum, then administer its removal with tweezers and scissors, and the cause of it will be lighter than all other causes that fall into the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	 But in the case of removing a worm born in the ear, when you treat it with water as we have said in the division and in the tract on distillations and your treatment does not work, then you must look at the ear in the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And therefore if any cause of the worm appears here, then extract it with tweezers or fine scissors, but if no cause appears, then take a straw that is thin at one end and wider at the other, for this is its form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	 Based on the provided context and similarity to medieval medical texts in Latin-based languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, of which this is its shape.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	 And make it of silver or iron, very narrow, in which there is a small hole, and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	 Therefore, let it be pushed so that it is in the cavity of the ear canal where it will be necessary to place the medicine.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	 And if you wish, take the reed and wrap its end tightly in cotton. Then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any of these medicines into the canal — which is in the ear —, then insert the reed with the cotton on top and squeeze it gently with your hand so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	 And let what has been poured into the ear be already heated by fire for a short time.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	 And take care that the substance you pour into the ear is not too cold, because the medicines for the ear do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	 Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	 On the treatment of ear impaction.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	 Based on the provided context and the similarities to medieval medical treatises in Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	 And that which happens in his chest, and which does not include the viscera, is in the most difficult conditions for healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	 And in that which you find the viscera, it is necessary that you place the patient's ear towards the sun and look into it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if you see an obvious obstruction, open it with a fine spatula that matches its shape.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	 If the opening of it is small and one side of it is sharp while the other is not, then let the spatula be two finger widths long, so that it does not harm the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	 And if the obstruction is due to flesh born in the ear or its canal, then take that with fine scissors and cut it down vehemently until all the flesh has been removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	 And if the obstruction is in the depth of the ear, then take a thin reed and heat it with fire for a short time, and then insert that into the canal of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	 And if you sense an obstruction with water that the patient finds with ease, due to the heaviness of the ear, force out its pressure with ease; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Here is the translation of the given text:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	 If blood flows out, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the wound, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	 Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	 On the care for athelia which happens to the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	 Athelia which occurs on the eyelids of the eyes is sometimes moist, and at other times it is dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	 Therefore, you should have those with honey or wax, and cut them with the blade from their roots, and then place them on the affected areas as described.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	 But if there is pain with a flow of blood, then you should cauterize those with a fine lenticular cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	 And the best cauterization is near the incisions and if it recurs many times when there remains some cause of its roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	 Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	 Treatment for swelling that occurs on the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	 Often there is on the eyelids of the eyes some cause which resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	 Here is the translation for the given text:
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	 Based on the given text, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	 Based on the given context and the similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the sentence:
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 Here's the translation for the given sentence:
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 If the wound is large, then you should stitch it closed; and care for it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	 And if it is minor, then no harm will come to you because the salve of the wound will heal and close itself.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 And if the ulcer is declining into the inner parts of the eyelid, you must examine the inner surface, so lift the eyelid and suspend the ulcer with a hook or something similar that you have on hand, and press it from all sides. And if the eyelid due to the ulcer has become elongated, this is of no concern whatsoever.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	 Then for the treatment, wash the wound with salt water; and care for the place with something that closes until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	 Chapter X
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	 On the care of the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	 A cyst is a growth that forms in the tissues of the upper eyelid, and it most commonly occurs in children, making their eyes worse and causing them great discomfort; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears are constantly coming to them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	 And for this reason you see these children constantly making faces, even in their sleep; and thus the edges of their eyelids are always moist, which have already been covered with swelling, and the appearance of impending blindness is in the eye; and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel hardness inside it.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	 Certainly! Here is the line-by-line translation of the provided text:
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	 Based on the provided text and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	 Here's the translation for your provided sentence:
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	 "And be careful not to adjust in the opening, so that with the spatula you do not reach the scent and thereby cause a disturbance.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	 "But if it does not appear to you at first in the beginning of the opening, then adjust slightly into the opening for ease until it appears; and then extract it as we have said; and then soak rags in water with vinegar and place them over the area and hold them tightly.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	 "And thus some cover it with salt and place it in the cavity of the opening, so that what remains of its moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "And then care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	 "But if a hot abscess occurs in that place, then treat it with poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	 "Chapter XI
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	 "On the ways of touching the nose.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	 "When under the eyelids of the nose, there are natural hairs that have been displaced and old, these irritate the nose and cause various illnesses such as continuous tears and softening of the eyelids until it causes destruction of the nose, which is called touching of the nose. And it is treated in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine as previously stated in the chapter on cautery; or it is touched by incision and suture; or with canes as I will now say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	 Based on the given text and its translation, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	 The text appears to be describing a surgical procedure involving the eye and eyelid. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	 Certainly! Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	 And then open with the spatula over the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the greater tear duct to the lesser tear duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	 And if your incision is near the natural hairs, as in the case of a king's size.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	 Then place the scissors in one of the two corners of the hemorrhoid and cut it all away. Then adjust the two lips with silk or fine wool thread, clean the blood, and make what exceeds the threads adhere to two eyebrows with some viscous substance, if you wish to do so; otherwise, don't care.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	 Then remove the thread stitch after three or four days, and then cure it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	 And if you wish, leave the wound without stitching and cure it with something that dries and constricts, for the eyelid is lifted because of the closing of the wound and its adhesion; but stitching is better. And therefore, the ancients said this about healing. 😊
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	 But nevertheless, be concerned for the patient and it is a good operation, and there should be no fear of it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	 And there is another way to heal it, and that is to mark on the eyelid the shape of a myrtle leaf, and then lift the eyelid with three separate and joined needles in this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 Certainly! Let's translate the given text line by line:
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then carefully close the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure what is within so that it may heal.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	 But if an abscess occurs, you should incise or make a fistula for it, and then cover that abscess with a patch and something similar to it, along with ointments.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	 And sometimes it is necessary for the eyelid to have its hairs removed. Then you should use what we said about incision on it, but stitches are more artful in each case.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	 Treating with canes follows this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	 And it is that you turn the eyelid and cut the figure inside according to what I have described; then by skill, make two canes or two fine sticks, the length of which should be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width should be less than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	 And you have already cut at the ends of each section where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	 Then add each one with finesse under the excess of the eyelid's skin, and tighten the canes of each section with a strong knot, and leave it for several days, because the string through the tightness will die and loosen until it falls off by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	 If it's delayed, then use a saw with the tourniquet, and immediately treat the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	 Therefore, when it is swollen, the eyelid is raised, and the hairs do not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	 And this is the way to make two reeds according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	 and let there be the quantity of length and width, neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter .12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	 On raising prickly hairs on the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	 When the hairs are unnatural, hard, rough, and prickly on the eyes, then the operation in this case is that you take a fine needle and place it in that thread of silk and linen, and then you adjust the extremities of it so that they are joined together in a very subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	 And let the length of the threads be about the length of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	 Then you tie another fine thread underneath it in a short time, and knot the ends of that thread if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	 Then place the patient's head in your lap, and let it be near the sunlight so that your work is visible, because it is a subtle and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	 And then immediately insert the needle into the root of the eyelash that requires it, and make that penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract it above the natural line of the eyelid.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	 And then pull the hair into the same place and insert that into the tweezers, and let there be one or two or three hairs, but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	 And then pull your hand with it until the hair is removed from the eyelid together with the tweezers and the natural line of the eyelid.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	 But if the tweezers are pulled and the hair is not removed, you will pull the tweezers again from the sides with the thread that you have composed with it, until it comes out of the hole above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	 And examine it with the eye vision, because when you remove the tweezers and the thread, and close each eye tightly, and leave the eyes closed for two days or three, until the hair adheres to its place and good flesh grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	 And if the hair is too short, then you take a long hair from the natural ones, and lift it with that, or leave it until it has lengthened somewhat, and then you lift that one.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	 Of the treatment for cataracts that appear on the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	 When cataracts appear in the eye and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts upward, or to the right or left side due to improper healing from injury, cut, or cautery, it is called leporine cataract. This type of cataract can be either natural or accidental and is caused by poor healing from injuries, cuts, or cautery, or it may resemble other eye diseases.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 The way to operate on it is to cut open that scar and separate its edges, then place between them a piece of linen cloth, and bind them together until they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	 And it is not necessary to treat the cause of leporine cataract with drying or restrictive measures, because if you do so, the cataract will return even worse than before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	 Use for it causes that soften, such as fenugreek, and boil it with water in which althea and linseed are cooked, or ointment of diaquilon, which should be liquefied with some oil, and soak the piece of cloth in it, and treat it with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	 "And the treasure of your care is that you pierce with all the skill that is not solidified according to the form from the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	 "And this operation which we have mentioned is nothing but a rectification of alchacra that does not return the form of the place as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	 "Chapter XIV
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	 "About the care of alchacra which is made in the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	 "This alchacra which is made in the lower eyelid, which is truly called alchacra, can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	 "But an accidental one is caused by a wound, cut, burn, or other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	 "And the way to perform the operation is to take a needle with a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	 "Then extend the flesh at the edges with the needle and sew it together with the needle, and cut it off with a wide spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	 "And thus if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should, that's good; but if not, take a reed and place it on the split figure, and with that straighten the eyelid, making two slits in the lower edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	 And let the ends of the two fissures be at the two corners of the incision that you have made so that they converge, and let there be a triangle formed by their intersection when they come together.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	 And this figure is Greek in shape: Delta.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	 Then cut the flesh to the extent of the length of the pointed instrument below it, which should be the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	 Then adjust the separated parts and suture them with wool thread; then treat them with the aforementioned softening medications and warm compresses until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	 And if the eyelid needs to be incised by a cut or suture or cautery, then you must make an incision with a flat blade on the eyelid hair according to what has been stated before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	 Then separate it with warm compresses between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	 In the summary of the treatment for drooping eyelids, whether it is above or below, let the operation be performed as prepared in the form of the eyelid, and this should be varied according to the shape of the eyelid.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	 And the wise artisans always prepare a tool in every possible way that can return the figure to its natural shape or near it, and this patient according to what is convenient for him in terms of the operation and the instruments in the best arrangement.
Capitol .xv.	 Capítulo XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	 "On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	 When this adhesion occurs to many people such that the eyelid is stuck above the eye, and its movement and natural functions are hindered, then you should insert the tip of a reed underneath the eyelid and lift it up with it, or extend it with wax.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	 And then you should cut the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which is not sharp like incisions, but blunt a little so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and leave the spatula so that it does not scratch the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	 And let your cutting be such that it easily separates that adhesion until the eyelid is restored to its natural shape and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	 And then you should put salt water in the eye with which you wash it, or distill into it some dissolved juniper berries in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	 And then separate the eyelid from the eye with a little oil, and place over the eye wool soaked in egg white, and on the third day use consolidative plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	 Capítulo XVI. (Capitulo means Chapter in Spanish and Portuguese.)
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	 On the incision of a nail and the protuberance of flesh from the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	 Know that the nail is in two ways, either it is nervy and similar to a fine brittle thing; or it is non-nervy, similar to congealed white moisture, which when iron touches it, either it must be taken with pincers, cut off, and the pincers are not inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	 And both species begin only from the larger tear duct, entering little by little until it covers the sight and blocks the light and eye movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	 But the way to work in its incision is that the patient places their head in your hand, then opens their eyes, and raises the eyelid with your hand, then collects the nail with pincers of little double thickness and extends it on the sides above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	 Then take a needle and insert a horse's hair or cow's hair or bull's hair, or similar strong thread, double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with thread; then extend it on both sides above, and remove the hair from the nail which is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	 "And thus you follow her with a needle into the back of him.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	 "And thus you incise the remaining part of the tear duct at its root with a fine spatula or small scissors, and clear away the skin of the natural tear duct so that continuous tearing does not occur from that incision.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "And sometimes the nail with the sole of the finger or with a thread, as we have said, and then it is scraped with a fine spatula, which has this shape:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	 "And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tissue and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is not pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 "Then place in the eye a little of crushed salt or powder made from dried sage, and leave it there until the next day; and then rinse it with water until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	 "And if the nail is not painful and you cannot insert the needle, or it is stuck in that nail, then many times this type of nail is treated with medications and healed as we have described earlier in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	 "And if you want to incise it, then open the eye of the patient and take a fine spatula with sharp edges like this:
am subtilitat.	 It seems like you've shared an incomplete sentence from the medieval medical treatise. However, based on the context provided, I can make an educated guess that "am subtilitat" might be translated into English as "with subtlety." This interpretation is derived from the idea that the text is discussing delicate medical procedures requiring precision and care. If you provide more context or the full sentence, I could give a more accurate translation.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	 Here is the translation of the provided text into English:
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	 And then perform the operation on that area until everything is removed from it, except for a contrarian pustule that may be in the eye, because if you leave that area, and initially treat the pustule until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	 And then continue your operation on that area with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	 The eminence of the tear-bearing flesh, if it is noticeable in the eye due to great harm, should be hung with an ounce; and you should incise that from one side, but do not finish the incision so that you do not cause a flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	 And then apply a poultice made of rosemary and sage to the tear duct until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	 On the incision of the eyebrow and on that which is born from tight flesh in the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	 Sometimes in the eyes of some people, red flesh is born and it is overgrown until it covers the pupil, or it presses closely against the eyelids and strongly squeezes the eyelids together at the outer edges, and it resembles a row of balusters.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	 But the operation on it is that the patient places their head on your lap; and then you open the eyes of that person and collect all that flesh with suitable scissors, and take that with a forceps or tweezers; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the scissors, and be careful not to harm the eye during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	 And use your scalpel with which you incise those areas or with spatula that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which ash is collected according to what will come later in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 Therefore, once your incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, fill the wound with crushed salt or pour into it powdered roga similar to that of corrosive medicines, and place over the wound outside a cloth dampened with egg white until an abscess is formed cautiously.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	 And if there remains any cause for concern and blood flows cautiously, and you fear an abscess may form, then leave the wound open and treat that area with water to promote the formation of pus. Then repeat the operation on it until it heals, similarly treating the adhered flesh that occurs in this type of wound.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	 However, you should avoid all care of the fresh wound by natural or accidental means, such as with iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is capable of bearing that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	 Chapter XVIII
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	 "Of the collection of sap in the eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	  "The sap comes from the veins that are stretched over the eye and prevent the eyelids from functioning properly, causing the eyes to swell for days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	 "Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the eye in which there is sap is strong and there is no other illness in it besides the sap, then you collect that sap.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	 "And you should instruct the patient to place their head on your seat, and then suspend those veins with a hook or two, according to your judgment; and let that hook be of fine double thread in this manner:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	 "or if two hooks are used gradually on one body in this manner:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	 "And then those veins should be collected with fine forces, gently and carefully, and you should cleanse the blood gradually until you see that the veins have been removed from the eye and are rolled up.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	 "And be careful not to touch the eye with the ends of the spatula; and if your operation is at midday before the sun, and you are very steady in your operation so that you do not cut anything but those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	 "And when you have finished, then you should drop clear or red vinegar into the eye so that with its sharpness it may dissolve whatever remains of the sap.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 Sure, let's break down the text line by line:
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	 And then proceed with the same manner until they are healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	 And this is the shape of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	 On the reduction of hernias in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	 When you cure hernias with a cautery or sharp medicine according to the preceding narrative and they do not heal, then do not cut into them but rather make incisions over the abscess until it is mature, and extract all the humidity within it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And thus when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then you should scrape it with an instrument of this shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	 And it is named a sharp point, and should be made of iron, and its head should be round like this, which should be punctuated with fine points by filing or sharpening with subtle precision (as shown in the following figure).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	 Place that [instrument] on the corrupt part of the bone, and then turn it between your fingers, and press with your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped off.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	 And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and astringent causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	 Here's the translation of the sentence you provided:
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	 Here's my translation of the given text:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	 The text seems to be describing some sort of medical procedure involving a limb (possibly a leg or arm) and a stick. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	 And then place that one on the bone, and let it be close to the tear duct; and slightly move your hand away from the eye, and then gently rotate your hand with the bone until it fully penetrates into the bone, and the patient will feel relief as a result of this action.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	 Therefore, at that time, restore the area with styptic medicines, drying it out just as you have been instructed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	 Therefore, when the flesh and the area have hardened, at that time the material that had been discharged from the openings returns to the nose, and thus it is easier on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	 Chapter 20
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	 On the Reduction of Eyelid Swelling
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	 When the eyelid swells completely and no harm or reduction occurs in the vision, it is necessary to let the patient rest, and then follow them, and then place cupping glasses on the neck without scarification for good suction; and then place a liniment on the eyelid that is made of acacia, aloe, honey, and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster on the eyelid with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	 And the manner of the powders is that you take many linen cloths, and each cloth is folded into four layers; and make many of these.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	 "And then place one over the other according to the amount of help that is needed.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	 "And then strengthen those with a hard cloth tied tightly; and use cupping glasses with suction without scarification; and then remove the cups and let the help remain tight day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	 "But if during that time the ligament becomes softened, then it should be very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	 "And then remove the ligament day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	 "And if you see that the help has already been reduced, good; and if not, then apply the plaster again with the powders, tightness, and cups until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	 "About the inflammation of the iris of the eye.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	 "When there is a rupture in the iris of the eye, and it protrudes outwards through the eyelids like a grain of millet, and its shape resembles that of a man, if you want to incise this, then the operation on him is as we have recommended: you insert the needle into the root of the iris from below towards above, and then insert another needle from the side of the lacrimal, making it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; then incise the place of the double veil and lift with that the part of the iris around the needle, and strengthen this very much.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	 And then remove the needle and place over the wound wool soaked in egg white, and let it sit until the thread is filled with pus.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 And then treat the wound with water that comforts it until the injury is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	 And sometimes cover the entire wound with a circular piece of cloth, then make an incision at the highest point of the wound with a thin probe that reaches to the bottom of the wound, allowing the moisture to drain, and then close the wound again immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	 And then strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter .22
De curacio de alconati.	 On the treatment of burns.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	 This illness called burns is nothing more than a condition that settles in the wound like descending water, but it is not.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	 But the way to deal with it is to make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take their head in your two hands from both sides and move it until you see the condition reaching the lower parts, and then dry it and prevent it from descending, and block the light, and let the patient see the causes as they saw.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	 And if it does not descend downwards, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	 Sure, let's translate the sentence into English step by step:
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	 When she is fainted, then you should instill in the nose warm water into which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 And then she should be treated with the other causes until she is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter XXII
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	 On the cure for water coming out of the nose.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	 As we said earlier, there are different types of water in the division, and which one should be pierced with an instrument depends on the patient's condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	 Then you must make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie his nose so that it is tight.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	 Then place your left hand near the eyelid of his nose, if the water is in his left nostril; or with your right hand, if it is in his right nostril.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	 Then with your right hand take almonds, if the nose is left; or with your left hand, if it is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	 Then place the tip of the almond near the edge of the nostril by the thickness of a reed in the inner corner of the eye, near the smallest tear duct, and then peel off the almond with strength and roll your hand with it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	 And then immediately enter into the patient's room and verify that the bleeding has already occurred due to the treatment administered.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	 And let the measurement from the bleeding site to the pressure point be equal to the distance between the center of the pupil and the edge of the black part, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see with that pupil the clarity of vision through the clear tunic of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	 And then place the bleeding point in the spot where the water is, and then pull it down once, and then again another time, and if the water descends quickly, then you will see the patient as if his vision improves immediately, and bleeding in his eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	 And then wait for a moment; then if the water has descended, you should stop that other time before the bleeding stops.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	 And then when it is dry and no longer descends, you can remove the bleeding point with ease, and roll it gently between your hands, and then dissolve a small amount of clear salt from a gem in water and use that to wash inside the eye; and then place outside the eye a piece of cotton or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white, and moisten the eye with this.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	 "However, we and those of our time use this remedy with an egg white mixture.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "But if your patient does not obey the instruction to drink the egg white mixture due to its harsh taste—for it is tough for some people—then you should take the ointment called alberith, of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	 "And so penetrate that joint with it, and do not remove your hand from the opening, lest you allow a subtle path for the humors.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	 "Then proceed to treat the patient as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	 "And you should complete the preparation of your work; let the patient's bedchamber be properly prepared so that he may sleep on his back in a darkened room, and all movements are forbidden.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	 "And place on him what will soothe his nature, and do not allow his head to turn to either side.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	 "And let the patient be treated according to their condition until the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	 "Then release him into that darkened room and let his sight be refreshed; show him some objects, and then resume treatment until the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	 "And it is not necessary to do this at the time of bleeding or immediately after purging.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	 They need you to remove this because water can rise easily due to great and intense pressure.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	 However, if an abscess forms, it is necessary to loosen the skin in front of the seventh day, and treat it with water that will soften the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	 Then you should cover the face of the patient with a cloth and place it over his mouth so that his breathing is controlled for some days, keeping him in the darkest room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	 And then gradually remove him from that room and return him to his normal surroundings.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	 And know that in the operating theater, the student is not exempt from certain views, and then you should be confident about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	 And now it has come to us from some of those who are in Arta, and one said that he made fire in the Magdalen Airac by making a hole with which water is drawn.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	 However, I have not seen anyone in our land who has done this, nor have I read about it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	 And these are the forms of the types of Magdalen wells for which one should know about them if he does not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	 And they are made of iron or properly of steel, and their ends have this subtlety: they are triangular, with the sharp end being the shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	 Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	 About the care for flesh cut on the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	 When on the nose there are born various kinds of flesh growths, one of which is caused by a bite from a scorpion or a stinging fish; and this disease is called polyp because it resembles that fish.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	 And if the flesh is cancerous or leprous and of a dark color, then it is not to be called "leon" but rather "carn.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	 Therefore, for the one who has these non-fraudulent and non-cancerous fleshy growths on his nose, you should have the patient sit between your hands and place him in the sun, and open his nostrils, and pick at those growths with your fingernail.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	 And then extract it from the surrounding parts, and then cut off what you have grasped with a sharp, fine spatula from one part until you know that all the flesh has been removed; because if any part of it remains that can be excised, then scrape it off with one of the fine instruments with ease until nothing remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	 Certainly! Here's the translation of your provided sentence:
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	 And then immediately place vinegar and water or wine into the nose.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	 But if the nose is open and moisture flows into the palate, then you know that it has already been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	 But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh swimming in the upper bones of the nose to which the opening has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	 Therefore, it is necessary to introduce fat into it, which has some thickness, and place nuts in it, and between each nut place the amount of a finger or hand, and prepare the patient and insert one end of the fat into the nose with a reed or with another suitable tool.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	 And after doing this, let it give off its fragrance until it reaches the passages of the nose, and is expelled from the throat, because many times children in schools do something similar to this action, and it is an easy task for those who want to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	 And then place the two ends of the fat, one end coming out of the nose and the other remaining in the nose, and immediately apply a piece of meat with the nuts that are in the fat, and do this until you know that the meat is stuck to the nuts of the fat.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	 And then extract the bile, and place a clove in the nose near the blood vessel, and do this for three days or more until the ointment has completely corroded everything that is rotten in the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	 And then at the end of the process, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	 But if you prefer a dry treatment, use that one instead.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	 And this is the form of the tool used for nasal irrigation with which oils and medicines are instilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	 And make it of silver or iron, which should be similar to a small open lantern, also like a small basin, and the mouth similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	 And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the end of the nasal irrigation tool should be flat and open; at the back of it there should be a handle with which you can hold it when you pour into it oil or water, or any juice that you want to suck.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	 And this nasal irrigation is effective: take of castor bean, white hellebore, ginger, saffron, long pepper, skirret, and a small amount of aniseed - six measures with the juice of lettuce and cabbage, and make pills from them. One pill should be dissolved in warm water and dripped into the nose of the patient lying down.
Capitol .xxv.	 The text seems to be in Old Occitan or possibly Old Provençal, which are medieval Romance languages closely related to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Let's translate the sentence line by line:
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	 From the tips are born in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	 Many times a tip is born in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and noted on certain days until it is removed from view.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	 And for this reason, you should intervene at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	 Then place over the area either a cautery or a burning medicine that was in its place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	 But if its removal is delayed until it has grown, then consider whether it is hardened, solid, of dark color and with little sensation; then do not touch it with iron because it is a crancous abscess; for many times that which you remove this abscess does great harm to the one on whom it was.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	 And if the abscess is of a tender touch and not of dark color, and if removal is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and remove it without fear, and treat the area with that which dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter .26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	 Of the suture of the nose and lips and ear when continuity is broken by wound or similar cause.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	 You should know that when there is a disruption in the continuity of one of these small cartilages, only a few people will benefit from this operation.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Therefore, when someone has any of these causes, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with blood, and then join the two lips of the wound with stitches, and then take care that it heals from within.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	 And if the lips of the disrupted continuity are already separated and each is healthy, then it is necessary that you cut off each part of its apparent cord until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then join the two lips with stitches and strengthen them, and sprinkle some dragon's blood powder and trissat on top of them, and place a piece of fine emplastrum or one of the other consolidating emplasters on the powder, and leave it in place for two or three days, then remove it and replace the emplaster, leaving it until the threads are naturally dissolved, and then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	 But the method of stitching is that you bring together the disruption in continuity either with needles as we have described in the stitching of the belly, or bring together the disruption in continuity with thread as you have been taught.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	 About the removal of that cause which occurs in the inner lips of the genital area.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	 Often observed in many men inside the lips of their genitals are hard growths resembling pork fat, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	 Therefore, you should turn the lips and folds where each of those hard growths is located, and then remove them by cutting them out until the bleeding stops. After that, wash the area with vinegar and treat it with water that has astringent properties until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	 About the incision of the flesh attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	 It is often seen that there is flesh attached to the gums which the ancients called "albulus". Therefore, you should suspend it with a hook or forceps and incise it until it bleeds.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	 Then place on the area some powdered sage or other powders that have astringent or drying properties.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	 And if the flesh returns, then incise it again and cauterize it, because after cautery it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter XXIX
De razo de dentz am ferr.	 Concerning toothache with fever.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	 When the surfaces of both upper and lower teeth, as well as the spaces between them and the gums, are rough, dry, and sometimes blackened or yellowed until the gum becomes corrupt and the teeth loosen.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	 Therefore, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and place their head on your lap, and scrape the teeth in which those rough areas appear with a tool resembling sand until no cause remains; this will remove the blackness and yellowing and other issues until they are cleaned.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	 If this does not cause the pain to stop as described at the beginning of the condition, then do so again on the next day and the second and third days until it reaches its final state as you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	 And know that teeth require many different tools of various shapes and forms, depending on what is needed for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	 And because the instrument with which the upper tooth is scraped differs from that with which it is scraped between the teeth according to other shapes, and you should prepare these forms of instruments as you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	 The sentence "Capitol .xxx." appears to be indicating a chapter or section number in the medieval medical treatise. This would typically mean Chapter 30. So the translation for this line is simply:
D’eradicacio de dentz.	 "About the removal of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	 "Cover that you cure the tooth of its pain with all skill and delay in all its removal, for there is no reason to replace it when it has been removed, for it is a sublime substance until its extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	 "But when the patient is forced to extract that tooth, you must be firmly certain which one is the painful tooth, for often the pain deceives the patient and it seems to be in a healthy tooth. And if you extract that one, then the pain will not cease until the sick and painful tooth has been extracted, because we have seen this happen through the work of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	 "Therefore, as you must be certain which is the painful tooth and you know it well, then you should scarify around the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it dissolves from the gum on all sides. And afterwards you treat that [area] with your words, or with fine forceps little by little at the beginning until you reach it.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	 "And afterwards, hold him firmly with strong hands for good speech or powerful traction, and place the patient's head between your knees so that he does not move, and then extract the tooth according to its right direction in such a way that you do not break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	 And so if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it under the patient in such a way that all parts are moved with ease and strength, as was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	 But if the tooth is cracked or rotten, then you should fill that crack with cloth and tighten it with a thin thread so that it will not break during your pulling with the forceps.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	 And it is necessary that you work meticulously with scraping around the entire circumference of the gum and be careful not to break the tooth so that it remains intact, and return to the patient because the pain will be greater than before.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	 And beware not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their arrogance and audacity regarding the removal of teeth without administering what we have recommended; for many times they bring great troubles upon sick men that are more difficult to heal, and the reasons for this are all, or some of them, or because you extract that tooth along with some bones from the jaw as well, just as we have testified on many occasions.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	 And before removing it, the mouth should be washed with warm water or vinegar and salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	 If there is bleeding through the wound, as if it were many small vessels, then sprinkle some amount of dry powder on the wound and, if the powder does not help, use a cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	 The shape of the forceps and thin tongs with which you begin to extract the tooth should be long at the end, short in handle and thick, so that they are not bent when you have to work with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	 And thus the handles should be of such a size that when they are tightened with these, they are not bent, and they should be short at the end.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	 And they should be made of Indian iron, straight at the end, and on the ends of these there should be teeth, some of which go into others and tightly constrain by force, and sometimes the ends of these are in the shape of a stork's beak, which is wide, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter 31
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	 On the extraction of teeth and the removal of bones from fractured jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	 When you need to extract a tooth that is fractured, you should place a cotton cloth with a border over the area for one or two days until the area becomes soft; then insert tongs or tweezers, the ends of which resemble the beak of a bird called a stork or heron, in the shape of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	 Based on the context and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a possible translation of the given sentence:
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	 And if the patient does not comply with your instructions using these forceps or tongs, then it is necessary for you to cut into the flesh and expose all the meat, and insert the instrument which is called "atali", that is, a small lever, whose form is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 And let it have a tip that is slightly thick, and not be bent so that it does not become stuck.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	 Therefore, if the flesh is thus penetrated, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments, of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is that of a triangular tip in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	 The shape of the second instrument should be more subtle at the tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	 And having already helped with these instruments, which have two ramps, their form is approximately as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	 And with other instruments which will be used for dental scraping; because this has been done with an instrument that resembles a large needle, and this is its shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 With a twisted or short triangular tip that has some thickness, and not bent, so that it does not become stuck.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	 And know that the tooth extraction instruments are similar to and resemble other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	 Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence:
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Certainly! Let's translate the given sentence step by step:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	 And if there is any swelling in the patient, gradually reduce it and hold it with your mouth so that it does not spread or escape until the bone of the whole area is removed; then restore the area with suitable medicine for this purpose.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if there is a small hole in the bone, then scrape away that hole and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter 32
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	 Of the care for prominent teeth over others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	 When teeth are prominent and do not follow their natural shape, which can be ugly, especially when this happens to women, and more so to venerable young girls; then you should consider: if the tooth is nothing more than another tooth, and it is impossible to extract or trim it, then remove that one; but if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, which looks like a pig's snout, and is made of Indian steel with a very sharp tip.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	 And make your cut with the instrument you will use to cut it over several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that no other tooth is affected.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Here's the translation for the given line:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	 And let it all be made of Indian iron; and the points should be very small, like those used to make needles, with which the tooth should be filed little by little over many days gently, so that no other tooth is affected or injured.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	 And then bind it in the end, and rinse it with alkaline solutions.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	 And if it is a tooth from which a piece has broken off and the tongue touches it, then you should file that part until the roughness of that fragment is removed and smoothed out, and filled in so that the tongue does not cut itself and the speech is not impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	 On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	 When it happens that the front teeth are dislodged or displaced by a blow or fall, and the patient cannot chew, and you have treated him with astringent medicines, but your treatment has not worked, then in order for them not to decay, fill those strong ones with gold filling and not silver, because silver turns black and decays quickly after a few days, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	 And then gently return the tissue into the opening from which it began, strengthening your hand with ease and skill until it is not displaced.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	 And with the bandage you have used to reinforce the wound, you should clean the teeth so that they do not become infected.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	 And then cut the ends of the excess bandage with scissors or tweezers, and add those to each place with skill, and turn them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that they do not harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	 And then leave it thus bound tightly like this.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	 But if it becomes loose or torn, strengthen that or those with another bandage in the same manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	 And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth and two decayed teeth, as you see these bound together.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	 And when it is done that one or two teeth return to their place, and they are sewn as we have described, and that they remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	 And only do this if you are a skilled craftsman and wise.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	 And sometimes it is appropriate to use some cow bone for this purpose, and they are made into the shape of a tooth, and they are placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and they are strengthened as we have said, and they remain and serve with that for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 Chapter XXXIV
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	 From the beginning of the complaint that affects the tongue, and prohibit speaking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	 This complaint that appears under the tongue sometimes is either natural and present from birth or accidental and occurs due to a wound that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	 And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient, with his head tilted back; raise his tongue, and then cut that nerve-filled complaint according to its length until the tongue is released from its tension.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	 However, if there is any hardness or knotting, and this has happened due to the healing of a wound, then apply oil and cut it lengthwise until you have cut through the complaint and the knot has been dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	 And be careful not to make a slit in the surface of the flesh, and that you cut only the tendon and cause blood flow. ↑ Back to top
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	 Then wash the traces of the incision with vinegar or warm water, and place under the tongue a soft cloth; this is what will hold the patient's tongue under the tongue every night so that it does not stiffen again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	 "But if there is a flow of blood, place powdered vitriol on the area; but if the blood continues to flow, then cauterize the area with an ancient cautery that is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 "And treat the patient with other remedies until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	 "On the removal of a ranula from under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	 "Sometimes an abscess forms under the tongue, resembling a small bladder, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function; and soon it swells greatly until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	 "The operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and observe the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	 "And if you see that it is of dark or black color, hard, and the patient does not feel pain in it, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 "And if it inclines towards whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you insert a lance into it, and you cut that with a fine spatula, and you divide it from all sides; and if blood flows during your operation, then you place powdered sulfur, which is vitriol, on top until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 And then return to your task until you have completed it, until he is washed with vinegar and salt; and care for him with the other treatment so that he may be healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	 On the removal of abscesses from both ears, and on those that grow in the throat, and on other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	 When there is an abscess in the throat, they are glands that resemble cotton, which come out from inside and are called two ears; when you treat them with the water we have mentioned in the division and it does not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, with little sensation, do not touch that one with iron.  (In other words, if the abscess has these characteristics, do not use a cautery on it.)
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	 And if it is red in color and the root is thick, then do not touch that one with iron because of the blood flow; rather let it be until it ripens, and then either you will pierce it, or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	 And if it is white in color, reddish, and its root is fine, then that one is the type that needs to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And the operation on him is that you should first consider before your operation if the abscess has been properly drained or if it has decreased somewhat; then make the patient sit facing the sun, and let his head be in your lap, and open his mouth, and a servant holding between his hands should press the tongue of the patient down with an instrument of noble design like this:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	 And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be thin like a knife blade.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	 So when you press with it on the tongue and see the abscess, catch it with your thumb and index finger, then take a knife and place its edge under it, and pull it outwards as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Another thing that may be pulled out some of the membranes, then cut it with an instrument like this:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	 and it resembles forceps, but the tips of them are curved in such a way that the opening of one is facing the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron that has been quenched.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	 But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a scalpel that looks like this: and let one side be sharp, while the other side is dull.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	 And since you have incised one wound, incise the other in the same manner of incision. Then let the patient heal from cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 But if there is bleeding, let the patient heal with water boiled with pomegranate rind or myrtle leaves and similar to that, stiptic substances, until the blood flow stops, and then care for him until he is cured.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	 And sometimes this appears as boils or abscesses or both ears, and incise them just as I have said about the incision of two wounds.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	 And I have treated a woman with an abscess that was formed on her throat, which was dark in color and nearly insensible, having already closed her throat, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, and I had forbidden her to eat or drink water, and she would have died if it had lasted for one day or two more.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	 And the abscess had grown so much that it was pushing out through two passages.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	 Therefore, I made an incision and placed one of them in one of the openings, and pulled it out, and a large piece came out with it. And then I incised that which was understood from the other opening, and then I held her mouth open, and pressed her tongue down, and then I placed the instrument in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	 And you should cut away a large part of him, and there should be only a little blood coming out from him.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	 Therefore it is certain that the woman's gallbladder has been removed, and she should begin drinking water immediately, and then take food afterwards. I did not stop cutting out parts of that abscess many times over a long period, and another abscess developed in its place, which I cut open until it extended to that point.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	 Therefore I cauterized and burned the gallbladder of him, because of this addition; and then I walked around and did not know what God did with that afterwards near me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter .xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	 About the cutting of an umbilical hernia when it becomes inflamed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	 When the catarrh descends to the navel and it is inflamed and long, then it is named a perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part and is large and round, then it is called a buba.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	 But when it is healed with the water we mentioned earlier, and you do not complete your treatment, and likewise if you have already cut out an abscess that was thin, then you should cut off what is attached and round; and if it is of this length, and it is bleeding, dark red or black in color, and it does not heal, then you should attempt to cut it out, because there is danger for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	 And it is necessary that you do not ask him about that, but only what is related to the natural course of events without addition, because if you ask him more than that, you will disturb his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 And for the questioning, use what we have recommended for the questioning of two melons, and take care to do so until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 But if the patient is afraid of being questioned, it is necessary to use cunning in their cauterization without fear. The manner of the cautery on them is only with sharp water, and you should place the head of the patient on your lap, then press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier. Then take some of the water that has been described in the chapter on cauterization, and perform with it a living cause. Place this neither too thick nor too thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape is as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	 Let the opening of the concavity in which the medicine is placed be like the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the lower lip of the patient, who should then bite down on their tongue so that saliva or mucus from their mouth flows out due to the intrinsic medicine, so that none of it goes down their throat and they are not harmed by it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	 And then take your hand with the medicine, and squeeze it over the uvula for the space of a half-hour until you see it become blackened and soothed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	 And if you wish, take some cotton and wrap it around the tip of the ray (penis), and submerge the cotton in medicine, then insert the penis with the cotton into a glass or tube until the cotton adheres to it, and do this as many times as necessary to achieve the desired effect of cauterizing the uvula. Then leave it alone so that it will dry and fall off in about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	 And if you need to repeat the application of the medicine, repeat it. Then, after cauterization, clean the surrounding area of the uvula with cotton dipped in wine vinegar, and rinse it with the liquid that is around it from the medicine. After washing with cold water, treat it externally with embrocation, and internally with gargles until it heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	 And this type of treatment is more effective and longer-lasting.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	 Sometimes the uvula is healed with something more subtle than cautery and incision, for it can be cured by sublimation in this manner: Take calamus, hyssop, oregano, rue, dried grapes, chamomile, savory, and similar herbs. Mix all these or some of them in a pot, soak them in vinegar, and let them boil; the pot should be well-sealed with clay, and in the middle of the pot there should be an opening, over which you place a concave instrument made of silver or iron in this manner.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	 Here's my best guess at translating the given text into English:
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	 And then repeat the treatment on those parts until they are dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the onset of abscess formation, because it would constrict the abscess too much, and you should not do this unless you have obtained the permission of the patient's physician.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	 But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach a hen's egg to its end, so that the patient's mouth may be protected, because the shell of the egg prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	 And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Chapter .xxxviii.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	 Of the removal of splinters and of water that adheres in the throat, and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	 Various things adhere in the throat or a thorn from fish or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	 Then it is necessary that you extract the water that is apparent from these things, which you see when you press the tongue with an instrument before the sun, so that what is in the throat may be revealed to you.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	 And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because often the cause attached to the throat is expelled by vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of onion or a lettuce root or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of marine sponge, moisten it well with honey, and then have the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where there are splinters, they will be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	 And moreover, take an eel and have it bound in a towel, and place it inside the tablecloth, and afterward extract it; or take a leek and place it under the tablecloth, and afterward remove it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	 And if you do not remember those reasons which we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	 And let it be thicker than a small reed, and at the end of it there should be a cavity which you insert into his mouth easily.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	 And let him keep his head raised upwards, and be careful that the touch of his throat bone does not cause damage to his body or dislodge a bone or spine, or that which the physician does with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	 But however, it is better that the patient who inserts this does so skillfully, due to his knowledge of the place and cause attached, and pushes downwards, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the amount which has been prepared inside until it is removed.
Capitol .xxxix.	 Chapter .39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	 On the Extraction of Bloodsucking Insects Attached to the Throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	 When a bloodsucking insect is treated with the water which we mentioned in the division of treatments without surgery, consider then in the throat of the patient carefully, after you have pushed down his tongue with an instrument which we have recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	 If you see a leech, extract it with a small hook or with fine tweezers gently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	 If you cannot extract it in this way, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and place an ignited iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this several times (until the leech is dead and removed from the throat) and abstain the patient from water for the entire day. ⇔ If you cannot extract [the leech] in this manner, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and place an ignited iron in the concavity of the cannula, and repeat this process until the leech is dead and removed from the throat. Ensure that the patient abstains from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	 Then take a bowl full of cold water and place the patient's mouth into it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not swallow any of it, but spit out the water after an hour or so using your hand, for as soon as the leech feels the water, it will release.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	 However, if it is not removed with the water we mentioned, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	 Based on the pattern of the given text, here's a line-by-line translation for "Fay aquo, so en quar cayra":
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	 And if [the cautery] is not done, then you should repeat the fumigation many times, and prevent the patient from drinking, and eating salty and cold foods, and they should not drink water. It is necessary that with this treatment, the [condition] should be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	 And this is the shape of the instrument with which bloodletting from the vein is practiced when it is visible; and it resembles forceps as you see them, except that there are some curves in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	 which is placed on the vein, and its end resembles the beak of a stork, which is curved, in which a file is sharpened, so that when you compress any cause, it does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	 Chapter .40
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	 In which is the summary of the discussion on abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	 Abscesses are many kinds, in many ways, as is remembered about them, each of which is described in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	 And they are different in their perforation and incision by two ways, one of which is according to the type of abscess itself; and because of what we understand from the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	 And the second manner is specific to the places where the affliction occurs in the body, for the abscess that appears on the head is different from the abscess that appears on the buttocks; and the abscess that appears in a fleshy area is different from the abscess that appears in a joint; and each of these has its own treatment based on their location.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	 And moreover, there are certain abscesses that should not be pierced until the pus within them has matured or reached its completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	 Other abscesses should be lanced when they are new and not yet matured according to their natural course, such as those that appear near the joints. For an abscess appearing near a joint prolongs its existence until it can spread to the surrounding area, and quickly the ligaments or nerves of that joint become corrupted, leading to contraction of that limb. Or if the abscess is near a main member, delaying the piercing until the pus has matured can cause damage to the main member; or if it is near the buttocks, then pierce it even when not yet matured, but do not pierce it while still immature and improperly digested, except for those near the buttocks, so that the pus cannot spread further inside the buttocks and create a fistula, or cause an incurable condition.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	 "But you should know the time for the incision of the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	 "And know that it is matured when there is relief from pain and fever, as well as a decrease in swelling and pulse rate, and the head of the abscess becomes more pointed, along with other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	 "And you should know that the incision should be made in the lowest part of the abscess, and from this comes the cure of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	 "And the incision should always be along the length of the skin or body, if the abscesses are in the places of hands or feet, and in the areas of wrists, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all parts except those in which there is reflection; because in those that are reflected, use incision according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	 "But when the abscess is in a fleshy part, it is better to leave the incision until its digestion has been confirmed according to our previous instructions; because if you incise before that, the body of the pus and much filth will be prolonged, and it will easily open the lips of it and increase its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	 This text appears to be discussing the treatment of certain conditions involving swellings or abscesses (apostemas). Here's a line-by-line translation:
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	 "And it is necessary to administer a small puncture, and for large abscesses, a large and wide incision or multiple shallow cuts according to the size of the abscess.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	 "And there are other types of abscesses where the blade should be concave and incised, when done so that it is as wide as a slice of bread, this is usually done in cases of double boils and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	 "And of those that are incised with a section having three angles, and among these is the one in which it is incised in the shape of a myrtle leaf, such as the abscesses of the inguinal region.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	 "And there are those in which a round section and a crescent-shaped section are administered, similar to the ones mentioned above.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	 "But in cases where it is not like the abscesses of leprosy, which are superficial, you should puncture them with a shallow or flat puncture only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	 "And when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, you should puncture it, but be careful not to draw out all the pus at once; having extracted a part of it, then bandage the abscess back up until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and repeat this process gradually until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	 And especially if the patient is a young child, or a pregnant woman, or an elderly person in decline, because their vital spirit often dissolves with the expulsion of blood, and it is quite possible that the patient will die, and you open them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	 Be cautious when approaching this chapter, and ensure that your puncture in the area you are treating is clean. Consider whether the wound from the abscess is small or a flat cut. If it is small, you should administer ointments of lily or cota antica. If the abscess is large and the openings are many, then place cotton wool in each opening until they all meet together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if in the abscess there is a part that has been cut off or hollowed out, then you should fill it with old cotton or cloth made into strips, as when you have crushed bread or radishes, without moisture; and strengthen it for three days; and then proceed to cauterize and treat it with water suitable for ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	 But if there is a flow of blood during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar in which you have soaked a linen cloth, and place it on the site of the bleeding many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	 If the flow of blood persists, then you should administer a regimen and treatment with the powders that are recommended in many places in this book and its divisions.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	 But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is a place with many nerves, then you should infuse powders in wine and hot oil, and place them on the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 And if it is in the summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil on them, and do this until the third day, as we have said, and then you should open the abscess and cleanse it, and administer to it the treatment that is suitable for it until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	 And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses in general, but according to the method of distinction I have already said how each type of abscess should be treated specifically by its own chapter.
Capitol .xli.	 Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	 On the cutting of abscesses that occur in the back of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	 In the back of the head, small abscesses form, and these are like certain types of knots that contain thin skins on their surface; and the type of these is many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	 And their blisters are formed, and from those that contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	 And of these are the ones that contain moisture similar to dust, and resemble them; and of these are those that are stony, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	 And in the cutting of all [of these], and in their removal there is no fear, because the extraction of them does not cause any contrary effect.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	 And the operation in cutting them is that you probe them with an instrument the shape of which appears as follows, which is called entromes, [you should] know beforehand what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	 Because if that which it contains is moisture, then you should cut it with a section according to the length by surface section as follows:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	 And begin the section at the line of .B. up to the line of .G. Then, once the moisture has been evacuated, you should excise that which contains that moisture, and leave no part of it at all, because if there remains any part, the swelling will return.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	 And then you should immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment, if available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with that and leave it for another day, because with water you will corrode everything that remains of that scab.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	 And then apply the Egyptian ointment on that swelling repeatedly and diligently if needed, until you are sure there is no further cause for concern about that membrane; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	 And if the abscess contains hard nodes, then you should cut it in this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	 with a section shaped like a cross, and place the scissors between two lips of the section and cut it out completely from all sides, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	 But if you encounter resistance with your scissors, then do what I previously told you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	 Similarly, do the same for the hardened abscess in terms of sectioning and care as we have told you; and sectioning over a hardened abscess is easier because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	 And sometimes there are certain abscesses in the head of some people with whom there is absolutely no moisture; this is because I once cut open an abscess on the head of an old woman and found it to be like a hard, rough, white stone that could not be crushed, and if anyone were struck by it, they would suffer.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	 And cover the hole of those from the lower part, so that the body is relieved of illness in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	 And then treat them with water appropriate for treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	 Chapter .42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	 Of the incision of scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	 Often these abscesses appear in the neck and in the armpits and groin area, and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And so those that occur in the neck, and many that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is within its own proper tunic, as we have said regarding the nodes and abscesses of the head.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	 And the species of these scrofula are many, because some are stony, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not obey treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	 Therefore, in that one which you see to be of good disposition in the touch, whose visible color is close to the color of the liver, and which is spread throughout, and which is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and which is not prominent, it is necessary that you incise that with a superficial incision from above to below the body along the line of G. between the line of B., and clean it entirely, and draw two lips of the liver with an ounce, or with many ounces if you need them, as we have said regarding the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	 And it is more cautious that the vein or nerve is not severed.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	 And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not cut into your hand, or disturb the patient, and cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you should cut a vein or artery and hinder yourself from your operation, then place on the wound vitriol trissat or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and compress the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the aposteme subsides and the wound becomes softened and begins to suppurate.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	 When the blood has been cut.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	 Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	 And then inquire with the patient's tongue if there is any other cause of the other small pustules, so cut and clean those as well.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	 And if there is a large vein at the root of the pustule, it is better not to cut that pustule from its roots.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	 Rather, it is better to lay that [pustule] with a strong double poultice and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm. ️
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	 And then fill the wound with old cloth that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	 And if you cut out the entire tumor, then you must join together the two lips of the wound and sew it shut immediately so that no excess remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	 But if you see that there is still excess due to the size of the tumor, it is necessary for you to understand how to cut out the root of it, and then extract it and administer a stitch as mentioned before.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And those tumors that contain moisture, pierce them with a superficial incision where you see the mature part, and place the puncture in such a way that the pus comes out from below, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	 And then administer the piercing with needles and similar ointments, so that it dissolves what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	 And when you see that the wound has been cleaned, then treat it with regenerative flesh ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	 Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	 Of the incision of the pus-filled boil occurring in the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	 The translation for the given text is as follows:
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	 And this is the prescription for those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	 But in men having scrotal swelling, the removal of the testicle should be avoided, because it does not help if done by water, since all the veins and major blood vessels of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	 But in those who have abscesses caught in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the disease is not in the bone, it is necessary to use the section of the testicle to prevent the loss which is caused by gangrene.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	 Therefore, when we want to do this, we should cut the testicle below three circles of the testicular circles, or four with a small section through the length between two circles for quantity, so that the section is in the scrotum, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for sectioning, because it lacks flesh and its blood vessels are thin.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	 And if the physician is faint-hearted, then he should extend the throat with an ounce of oil, and then split the throat until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any of them as a result.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	 Then cut the clitoris in the same way as we have recommended; and it is indicated on the section of the canal by the flame which comes out of that orifice with water, which is disrupted by it and by the absence of voice. ‍♂️
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	 And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	 Therefore, when the time of the feared perforation has passed, add two lips from the edge of the wound and stitch it up alone without a bandage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	 Then administer medicines that promote tissue growth until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	 And Ibn al-Baitar says that the summary of what we have discussed is nothing but a demonstration that some of these apostems have already taken the life of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and his soul has dried up, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes on the site of the wound for some breath, and he is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 And for this reason, I order that the wound be left open until the evil of the illness is consumed; and its evil lasts for three days; and then I command to stitch up the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	 And this that I have seen with my own eyes is that a maid took a knife and stabbed herself in the neck, and cut off a piece of the lung's trachea, and I was called to her care, and found her in the state as it is found in the dead, and discovered the wound and found the blood coming from the wound was little.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	 Sure, I'd be happy to help translate that. Here is my best guess at a line-by-line translation into English:
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	 And do not speak to the servant unless you have recovered your voice, and then after a few days return to improving their conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	 And now I say that in the section on headache there is nothing to fear.
Capitol .xliv.	 Chapter .44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	 On the section about an abscess which occurs on the neck outside and is called a hernia of the neck.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	 This abscess named hernia of the neck is a large abscess according to the body's color and it is very common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	 And it occurs in two ways, for it can be either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	 In the natural case, it is not worth curing.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	 The accidental case occurs in two ways: one resembles large nodes, and the other resembles an abscess caused by a knotting of the artery, and in that case there is danger.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	 And one should not make assumptions about it with iron as long as it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And you should approach that and investigate it as said, and if you find it resembling large nodes and not suspended by any of the veins, then you should incise it like nodes, and extract it with water in which linen and purslane are boiled; but if not, then you must thoroughly examine all its being, and afterwards cure the area with healing water until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	 "Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	 "On the cutting of various types of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	 "There are many types of knots, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	 "And it is appropriate that I explain the difference between a knot and a tangle, since there may be doubt about this.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	 "I say that in a tangle there is heat and fever and intense pain until the overflow of the excess is settled; and it is complete putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat then cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	 "But in a knot there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and I tell you about that cipher leon which is proper to the sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	 "And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a seed, and it is made as such: whether larger or smaller, there are two types, because they are either fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 "Therefore, when you come to the treatment of knots, you should examine it and inquire about its beginning with an instrument called an intromes, as will be shown in the following chapter.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	 And it is thus the method of inquiry for abscesses and all knots: you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid part that you find in the abscess, and you turn your said instruments little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the cord.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	 And then finish your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then extract the instrument and observe what has come out in its place.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	 And if the running humidity has come out, of whatever color it may be, then you cut it with a superficial incision as I have said for other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	 And if there is no humidity in the place of the instrument, then you know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	 And dry it with a scissors cut in the shape of a cross like this:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	 as you have been taught, and suspend it with hooks, and peel the cord from every side with ease, and keep the skin or bag, if possible, on that, and extract that corruption with the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	 But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that corruption, and many times it happens, and then you must extract it piece by piece until nothing remains of it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	 Because if any cause remains from him, a little or too much, the need returns according to the seasons.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And if you see that there is any small part remaining from him, then complete the wound with some corrosive and sharp powders and strengthen the wound; place a hot cautery on it to cause an abscess, and treat it with other treatments until he is cured.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	 And if the growth is large, then you should sew together both of his lips and treat it with a salve that heals flesh.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	 However, if the pulsatile vein is opposite it or non-pulsatile, then you should cauterize and fill the area with vitriol powder that has been dried three times; let it sit for two or three days until the wound softens and the boiling of the blood subsides; then return to cut away what remains of the growth.
Capitol .xlvi.	 Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	 About the shapes of the instruments necessary for incision and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	 These are the shapes of the instruments, which come in three kinds: one is large, one is medium-sized, and one is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	 The shape of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	 The form of entering the patient is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	 The way to enter the child is like this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	 They are made of iron, of alum, of burnt excrements, properly mixed so that they facilitate the entry into the anus.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	 And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are called plasters, and one of those is called birch.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	 And it consists of three species, because from them come large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	 The form of the great experience is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	 The form of the medium experience is like this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	 The form of the small experience is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	 It is fitting that they be used for those anuses, exits, fistulas and buboes, because among them are of the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	 And they are made round, large, lion-shaped, as well as like large needles with which the saddles are sewn, and they are made of citrus wax or of beeswax or iron, or silver, and the best are when they are made of citrus wax.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	 And the experiences are made with black feathers, which are arranged in such a way that the fistulas are opened in their cavities where they are reflected, so that they are reflected by their lightness with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	 And it is of three sizes, for some of them are long, and others medium-sized, and others short, according to the width of the fistula and its constriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	 Shape of a large lead probe:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	 Shape of a medium-sized lead probe:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	 Shape of a small lead probe.
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	 The shapes of the hooks are of many kinds, for some are simple and have only one curve, and they come in three sizes: large, small, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	 And there are also hollow hooks, which also come in three sizes.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 And some of those hooks have two curves and they also come in three sizes.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 And there are also those with three curves, which also come in three sizes.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	 And all these are necessary for their respective purposes.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	 Shape of a large simple hook, its shape:
Forma de unci simple migier:	 Shape of a medium-sized simple hook:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	 Shape of a small simple hook, its shape:
Forma de unci orp gran:	 Shape of a large hollow hook:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	 Shape of a medium-sized hollow hook, its shape:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	 Shape of a small hollow hook, its shape: ờ
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	 Shape of a large hook with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	 It seems like this text is discussing the form or shape of a medical instrument or tool. Let's break it down line by line:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	 This line means: "There are two types of cupping techniques:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	 This line means: "For large cupping, there are three variations:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	 This line means: "For medium-sized cupping, there are also three variations:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	 This line means: "Small cupping techniques also have three variations:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	 This line means: "And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and they come in three sizes, namely large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	 This line means: "Shape of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	 This line means: "Shape of the medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	 This line means: "Shape of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	 This line means: "The tips of these [scalpels] with which the incision is made are sharp, while the other tips are not sharp. They are not positioned in such a way that it might cause injury to a vein or nerve during the scraping of nodes, so that the patient may be healed and find some relief from the heat caused by the scraping of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	 This line means: "And these are the forms of cupping glasses, which come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	 It seems like the text is in Old Occitan or possibly Catalan, which are languages that share similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The phrase "La forma de magda gran:" translates to "The form of great magic:" in English.
Forma de magda migier:	 "Forma de magda migier:" translates to "The form of greater magic:".
Forma de magda pauc:	 "Forma de magda pauc:" translates to "The form of lesser magic:".
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the sentence:
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	 And it is in the left limb that has been punctured with a hidden spatula, and in that [limb] runs towards the separated parts inside and outside, when you want, thus as needed.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	 The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the aforementioned fingers for the perforation of abscesses and which patients do not perceive, come in three types: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	 And these are the forms of those [spatulas].
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	 The forms of bloodletting cups used to cut off the flow of blood are of three types: large, medium, and small.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	 They should be made of copper, round with some length, and they should be thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	 And these are the types of bloodletting cups you should have: large, medium, and small, so that through them you can cut off the flow of blood quickly when necessary, and initially it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	 However, do not use them to cut off blood from any part of the body, but only from fleshy places, such as on the thighs and hips, and on the arms, breasts, belly, and knees, and similar to their fleshiness.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	 And sometimes these instruments are made of other small shapes resembling fisac scorsas according to this form; through which the blood is cut when it is done by phlebotomy or a necessary incision of the vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	 And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter XLVII
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	 Of the care of male breasts, which resemble those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	 Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they start to get fat, and then the breasts also swell, resembling women's breasts, and they are quite visible, hairy.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And to those who have this, it is necessary to cut with a lunar section in the following manner: from line B to line G, and then excise all the fatty tissue, and then fill the wound with emplastrum medicamentosum, and then suture the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 But if the breast inclines to the sides and softens with its size as is fitting for women, then it should be divided into two parts above, with two lunar-shaped incisions, each of which is contained within the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from line B to line G. And then excise the skin that is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary for healing until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you did not cauterize the wound that needs to be cauterized due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until the ointment has dissolved all the fat, and then treat the area that has been healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	 Chapter XLVIII
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	 About the perforation of abscesses that come from the nipple.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	 These abscesses that come from the nipple are of the type of scrofula, hard, and contain a stone that is pus.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	 And of these, some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess has been evacuated, then you fill it with old cotton and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	 And then the cotton should be removed and the area treated with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	 And if the abscess is of the type of nodes or scrofula, then you should incise it in the same way as we said in the section on scrofula.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	 If the wound is spread to such an extent that it becomes gangrenous, then administer to them cautery as we mentioned earlier.
Capitol .xlix.	 Chapter 49
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	 Of the incision of abscesses that occur due to an arrow or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	 When an arrow is broken and the cord that was on it is consolidated, then numerous abscesses occur. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to artery or vein: for when an abscess is due to an arrow, it is extended lengthwise in the body; and when you press upon the abscess with these fingers, you feel in him a wheezing.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	 And that which is from a vein is round to the appearance of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	 An incision on this abscess is an error, especially in that which is below the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, so its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or at the head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	 But on that which occurs due to inflammation of the orifice of the arrow, cut in the long incision in the cord; and then widen the incision with hooks near the arrow, and deliver from the tunics until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	 And then place a needle on that and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the bowstring with double thread in two places — which is what I have seen in the extraction of two arrowheads from Templars.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	 And then press on the area between the ligaments with a spatula until all the blood comes out, and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 And then administer treatment on the wound until the ligaments fall back into place; and then treat it with suitable ointment until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	 And if it is an abscess due to the cutting of a vein, then you should have water close to the abscess with your hand, and then insert the needle where you had your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be double thread in it until you extract it from the other side, and then bind the abscess tightly with a good ligature as I have told you before in the case of the grape-sized abscess with two parts at both ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	 But if you fear that the thread may be pulled out, then insert the thread with that needle through all of the abscess from the entry point of the first needle, and tighten these threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	 This sentence appears to be discussing the treatment of an abscess (apostema). Here's a line-by-line translation:
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then place on the wound the cloth which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment that is made with cloves and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	 Chapter 1 of the abscess which occurs due to a twisting of the nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	 Similarly, an abscess can occur in the artery and in the vein, and similarly, an abscess can occur in the nerves when it occurs due to their compression or due to excessive work, and by similar causes.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	 And it most commonly occurs in the places of the ankles or the sole, or in any place where the joints are painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	 And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it is most commonly found in those who are weakened and when it becomes tight with intensity, the patient feels a similar numbness.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	 And it is not an abscess that grows on the front of the body, and for this reason it leaves the spine, and it hurts in all parts and does not go to the parts before or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	 Therefore, those that are on the joints should not be bound with iron, because very soon it will cause constriction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	 "But those that are in the head or in the forehead use a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	 "But if the abscess is small, then cut it with scissors and remove it by its roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "And if it is large, then suspend it with hooks, and excise it, and immediately remove it; and close the wound with stitches, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	 "Chapter I
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	 "On the incision of an abscess that occurs in the chest or in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	 "It happens to many men observed in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies which are called fungus due to their similarity to mushrooms, whose roots are subtle and the head is large; and now their lips have turned outward, and it is one of those that is small, and it is one of those that is very magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	 "And I have seen one, and in his belly there were two of those which were more similar to mushrooms, and there was no difference between the white ones, of small roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	 "And now their lips were turned outward and split open, and moisture ran from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	 Therefore, I cut them open and found that one had eighteen points and the other six points.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	 And the operation in their cutting is such that you should consider whether the patient is moist and the tissue is white and moist of fine texture; then cut with a broad spatula, and have cauteries ready in the fire, for many times you must remove much blood from them; and if you see blood, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	 And if the patient is weak and fearful, avoid cutting with iron; instead take freshly made lead paste and apply it to that tissue, in the manner we have described; and leave it there for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	 And then tighten the lead thread in the wound; so, do not stop reinforcing the lead greatly on the tissue until it is cut and falls out by itself without effort.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	 But if the tissue is of large size, then there is some cause for fear and dread in its cutting, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	 But it is possible to cut most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	 And then cure that within so that the wound may be healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	 And be careful not to cut into that which is dark in color, with little feeling, and slow healing, for that is also cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	 And I will come back to remember this crab [a type of tumor or growth] shortly.
Capitol .lii.	 Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	 On the treatment of a swelling of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	 A swelling of the navel is caused by several things: either by a tear in the peritoneum which lies over the belly, and from it comes out intestine or hernia as happens in other ruptures; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery as mentioned before, or by wind constricted within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	 However, if it is due to a tear in the peritoneum and the protrusion of intestine, then the color of the swelling is similar to that of the body; and it is soft without pain, and appears in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	 And if it is due to the protrusion of intestine, then its position is more varied and stronger than that which we have mentioned, and when you press on it with your fingers, it is hidden, and then returns; and it is lighter with hot baths and strong labor.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	 Certainly! Let's translate the given sentence line by line into English:
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	 And if it is due to blood, then use these signs to appear the aposteme in black decline.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	 But if it is due to flesh, then the aposteme will be severe, large and hard, and it is fixed according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	 But if it is due to flatulence, then touching it feels hot.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	 And the operation on it is that you should consider if the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or flatulence; then you must refrain from treating it, because in this there is fear and danger, as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about apostemas from an artery and from a vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	 And if the prominence of the navel is due to intestines or hernia, then you should command the patient to hold their breath and remain still; and then sign with your finger around the entire navel, and then command them to stay between your hands on their abdomen, and then surround it with a wide spatula around the navel over the spot that you have signed with your finger; and then extend most of the aposteme towards the top with a large hook; and then tie it in a circle with strong thread or silk and bind it according to the proper manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	 Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence:
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	 And if you have found the tissue, then take it with a hook; and incise the excess parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	 But if it is contrary to your bow or vein, then surround that spot and return to your task; take two needles and put in them two strong threads, and insert two needles into the circle you have made around the abscess, making sure they penetrate; then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place open so that the stretched flesh may shrink and fall by itself; or incise it when it is softened and has shrunk, and then cure it with water from the appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	 And if the prominence of the navel is neither flesh nor fluid, then you should draw out the abscess as we have said, and extract the blood or fluid that you find in it, and then cure it with water that heals and solidifies the place.
Capitol .liii.	 Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	 On the treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	 As we have said in the division, of the types of cancer and how to approach its treatment with medicines, and that it is avoided by treatment with iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have spoken of cancer developed in the mother and of the care required for its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	 And the ancients said that sometimes it is possible to remove it from the place where it is, such as with cancer located in the breasts or hips and resembling the limbs, to remove all of it, especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	 But when it is old and large, it is not worth approaching it, for I have not seen anyone cured of this, nor has it come to my attention that such a cure exists.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	 And the operation on it is as we have said, that you proceed and leave the patient and purge him of black bile several times, and then bleed him if there is found an obvious swelling.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	 And then prepare the patient with the preparation in which the operation is located, and then prohibit him from eating anything that is necessary for this; and then make sure to evacuate completely with good purgatives until there is no longer any cause of its return.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	 And let the blood flow, and do not stop it lightly, and squeeze the area, and wash away all the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument with which you can among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 But if there is a problem with the thick blood being issued from a vein or an artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood has ceased, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	 **Capítulo 4.**
De curacio de ydropici.	 On the care of those with dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	 We have already mentioned, in the division, the types of dropsy from water, and the symptoms of each type, as well as their treatment with medicine.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	 And that which is treated with iron is only the type of ascites alone, and it should not be treated with iron for tympanites or for the condition of edema, because that is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	 And when you have treated this type of dropsy, tympanites, with medicines and your treatment has not worked, then consider that if the patient is weakened by another illness or by another type of dropsy, such as coughing or abdominal pain similar to these, then be careful not to treat them with iron, because there is danger in this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	 However, if you see that the patient is full of vigor and has no other illness except dropsy alone, and is neither child nor old, then the way to operate on them is for you to lift the patient between your hands, and minister to him by pressing his abdomen with your hand, drawing out the water from below the navel, and then take a thorny spatula like this:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	 Certainly! Let's translate the text line by line:
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	 And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the bowels, for then it is necessary that you with the section be next to the navel by three fingers' width to the right on the patient's lower abdomen.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	 And if the generation of dropsy is due to liver disease, then your section should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers' width.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	 And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your section should be on the left side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	 And it is not necessary that your section be on the side where the patient wants to be treated, so that the excess does not flow into that cold place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	 And then pierce with the instrument all along the bowel, and then introduce it into that section, and lift your hand with a spatula between the bowel and the liver, and you will draw that out; and if the amount is of one fingernail or around it.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	 And then pierce the liver until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the water is located.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And then extract that and introduce an instrument of this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	 and it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or iron or bronze, at the lowest part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the tip of it is sharpened like a quill pen, as you see.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	 Based on the given pattern of translation and the similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, let's translate the sentence:
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	 And then remove the instrument, and retrieve the water that causes it, which is as soon as it is retained by the cord that pulls on the tube above the container from which I have instructed you to pierce it in that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	 And then repeat the process with the instrument on another day if you see that the patient tolerates it, and extract a small amount of water each time, doing this for several days, and be careful not to leave any water remaining.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	 But if you fear for the patient and leave a large amount of water, then cure him by burying [him] in hot sand, moving [him] under cold baths, and exposing [him] to the sun for a long time; and treat [him] with desiccating medicines until he is cured.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	 And cauterize the stomach and the spleen near the water extraction site, as I have previously described in this treatise.
Capitol .lv.	 Chapter .50
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	 About the care of infants whose urinary openings are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	 Sometimes, one of the infants comes out of his mother's womb and his urinary passage is not open (or it is very narrow or not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	 Therefore, it is necessary to cut with perforation as soon as it appears, using a very fine spatula in this manner.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	 And then place a thin lead pin in the hole and tie it, and keep it there for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	 And when he wants to urinate, remove it and let him urinate; then replace it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	 And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine flowing over this hole will not be able to escape.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	 However, that whose hole is narrow should be treated with a lead pin, as we have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	 However, those in which the hole is not in its proper place are called fistulas, and the reason for this is that from them, the one that is born is at the end of the penis so that he cannot urinate straight ahead, until he raises his penis with his hand above; and it is not a generative organ, because semen cannot reach the mother directly, and it is a very bad condition.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	 The method of operation on him is for the patient to be placed on his back, and then extend the head of his penis with your left hand with great force, and cut off the head of the penis from the foreskin with a sharp spatula, just like plucking a feather, so that the middle part comes out similar to the head of the penis and the hole falls into the middle as it should.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	 And be careful in your operation to control blood flow, because many times this happens; and hold the patient with something that stops the bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	 Chapter 56.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	 Of the whitlow that occurs in the foreskin at the tip of the penis, and of the corruption, blackening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the tip of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	 This whitlow occurs frequently in the penis and is a protuberance of soft flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	 And of these, one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	 Not malignant: you should suspend it with a subtle hook and cut it until it is completely removed; then place on it a cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; and then treat it with diachylon ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	 And if the whitlow is malignant, of dark color, then you should apply cautery near its root and base.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	 But if the whitlow is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the whitlow is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the part of the whitlow that is inside at the beginning until it is solidified; and then you treat the outside part, because when you treat both parts together with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not shrink. ️
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	 The text you've provided appears to be discussing a medical condition affecting the genitals and foreskin. Here’s a line-by-line translation:
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	 And then treat him with the other treatment until he is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	 But if there is a flow of blood, then apply a lunar cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	 for the cautery to be beneficial, it must address both conditions at once, namely the flow of blood and the corruption of the wound.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	 And if the tip of the penis is rotten and completely destroyed at that moment, then you must insert a lead tube into the opening of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	 In the case of adhesion between the foreskin and the tip of the penis (and this adhesion only occurs in those who have an intact foreskin, and for whom circumcision is not required; and when it happens due to a wound or an abscess) you should scrape with a blunt spatula until the band is dissolved and the tip of the penis is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	 And if it is difficult to distinguish them carefully, then you should scrape some of the skin from the tip of the penis and the foreskin, because the foreskin, being thin, is easily torn due to its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	 And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin thread, which has already been soaked in cold water to prevent it from sticking again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	 And then treat it with six stitches until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	 Chapter .57
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	 About the cleansing of infants and the care of those who have had circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	 Circumcision is not like other diseases: but because it is performed by our hand and will, especially on infants, it is necessary that we assign the best method and easiest way for them to recover their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	 Therefore, I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws. And it is only because we have acquired it through experience, which is why I have found most artisans and barbers using circumcision and cleansing with a razor and towels; and they use bandages with honey and incisions with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	 And I have tried all these methods and found none better than using scissors for cleansing, along with bandages of honey as in the case of using the nail, because many times the skin comes off above, because the foreskin has two layers, and the lower layer remains, and it is very thin and likely to cause another incision and pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	 And with purification, which is done by alphecati and is digital, the one that shoemakers use, the incision at the tip of the male member is not protected because it quickly enters its hole.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	 But in the operation with a nail, be careful to avoid iron and spoil your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	 And the foreskin of a child is naturally short, and many times it happens in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	 But of the purification that is done with scissors and ligatures with thread, the goodness, proven by experiment, I have discovered for myself, because the scissors are of proportional incision, in such a way that the sharpness above is as much as the sharpness below; and therefore when you press your hand so proportionally to the two sharp edges, and cut accordingly in one go in the same time; and it is made compression with thread in the shape containing the foreskin of the penis from every side, with which there is no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	 And the way to perform the first operation is that you make the child stay if he is one of those who understands a little, so that you do not do anything but tie the thread on his penis alone, and leave it there until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	 Here is the translation of the given sentence into English, keeping in mind the similarities between the text's language and Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French:
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	 And then make the patient stand between your hands, prepare them in advance and do not let them move; hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	 And then place your hand on the child's member and blow into the urethra, and pull it out until the head of the penis is visible, and then clean it of any impurities that have accumulated in it due to filthiness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	 And then tie the marked spot with a double thread, and then tie another small one below that second knot, and then take hold of the two threads and pull them apart under good tension, and cut between the two knots.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And then gently lift the urethra and pull out the head of the penis; and then allow the blood to flow little by little, for it is better this way; and sprinkle powder on it, and on top of the powder place a cloth in which is spread mullein oil made from recently boiled olive oil. And leave it there until the next day; and treat it with treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	 The shape of the scissors for cleaning, this is how they should be shaped:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	 This appears to be a description of the preparation of nails for some medical or surgical purpose. Here's a possible translation:
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	 But the mistake in cleansing is that you remove the entire internal chain or a part of it too quickly.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	 Therefore, you should stretch the affected area with your finger for one hour and then carefully cut it according to its shape.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	 And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with tweezers and cut it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	 But if three days have passed and there is still something inflamed under the skin, then leave it until the swelling subsides, and carefully remove the affected area, cutting it according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	 And be careful with the head of the vein, for it will not be there.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	 Therefore, treat it with something that solidifies the wound using the powders we have mentioned in the section on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	 And if the vein has been cut too much and it follows the above parts, this will not matter to him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	 And treat it with what we have said until he is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	 Chapter 58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	 On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	 Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction from stone or congealed blood, or from pus or a polyp, and similar things as we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	 And if the urine has not been dissolved and there is a retention of it due to a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over his knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	 Then place the feet of the patient on their back and extend their belly from the back towards the top of their back, and have the patient hold their arms as tightly as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	 Therefore, at that time, the neck of the bladder is constricted and the stone is expelled towards the back, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	 And if the stone has not been dissolved with the water we have mentioned and the cause has been vigorously applied to the patient, then you should administer extraction of it with an instrument called a syringe, which looks like this: Let it be of silver and be as thin as a reed, likewise as a quill from a bird's feather, with the thinness of a ray long in the likeness of a palm and a half, to which there should be a fine channel at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	 And the manner of urine extraction through this is that you take a ribbon folded in two and tie it at its end with wool or cotton for good adhesion; and insert the ends of the ribbon into the part below the syringe, and cut off any excess material from the wool with scissors, but insert it firmly into the channel. And then fill the syringe with water and egg white.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	 And make the patient lie down on their left side, and insert a catheter into their bladder and penis with moistened oils, olive oil, and hyssop.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	 And then insert the catheter with ease until it reaches the tip of the penis; then bend the penis upwards towards the navel; and then introduce the catheter into that opening; and then introduce it until it reaches the bladder, which will indicate to the patient that they have reached the void. If this is not done in this order, it should be done according to the meatus through which the urine flows.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	 And then gradually extend the thread with wool little by little, because the urine will wet the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	 Then extract it and perform the urination cure, using a catheter, do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	 Chapter 59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	 About the quality of bladder irrigation with instruments and similar devices that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood, or severe burning, and you want to distill water and medicine into it, this should be done with an instrument called a clampcedra, and its form is as follows:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	 If the extremity (such as a foot or hand) of the patient is numb, it means that it is paralyzed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	 And in that case there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	 At the beginning there is a hollow place where this thing is peeled off, and according to its quantity it is pulled out without any addition, until when some cause pulls the humidity out of it, it is pulled out, and when it is expelled, it is pulled out again with water, and if it is expelled long, like a clamp that holds naptha in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	 Therefore, when you want to prevent humidity in the bladder, insert the end of the clamp into the humidity and pull with it the water that is peeled off from the upper parts, because the humidity is pulled into the hollow of the clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	 And then insert the end of the clamp into the penis as we have described in the surgery; and then pull out the humidity with water that you use to peel it off, because that humidity goes straight to the bladder, and the patient feels relief.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	 The form of the subtle plaster with which the bladder is plastered, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	 And let it be made of silver or lead, with the end resembling a small feather, and then insert it gently inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	 And then take the bladder of an animal, place within it the moisture you wish to crystallize, and then tie it securely with a double ligature between two strong bands, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	 And then insert the end of the crystallizer into the vessel.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	 And then press your hand firmly on the bladder with the moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has entered the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	 But if you do not have a bladder, then take a bag of parchment and make a circle from it; pierce it all around its circumference; then insert strong thread into those holes, so that they are turned inside out; and then add the circle in such a way that it is sewn together like a sack, since you will place in it water or any of the moistures, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	 And then tie that [bag] to the instrument and use it in the same way as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	 Here is a possible translation for "Capitol .lx.":
De extraccio de peyra.	 About the removal of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	 We have already mentioned in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medications, as well as the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of the latter.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	 We have also discussed the stone that is operated on with the hand and by cutting it out.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	 And the stone generated in the bladder itself is that which is placed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	 And I will now describe it with clear and concise exposition.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	 So I say that the stone generated in the bladder mainly occurs in children; and among its signs is that the urine exiting the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears with sand in it; and the patient shakes their penis frequently, and often it is difficult to raise; and with this there are frequent feces.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	 And the healing of children from this before they reach fourteen years is easier, and in the elderly it is difficult to cure.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	 But in young people it is more likely because of this, which is among them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	 And that one whose stone is larger and the cure is easier; if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	 Here's a translation of the given text:
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	 And then the patient should be taken with his feet and placed in a position such that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or exits from its place occasionally.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	 And then prepare the scissors between your hands, and let his hands be underneath his body, so that the entire bladder is made to tilt downwards towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	 And then look for it and remove all of it from there.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	 So if you feel the stone in the space, then quickly cut into him with the scissors.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	 And if it doesn't come out with your touch alone, then you should anoint the index finger of your left hand with oil - if the patient is a child, or the little finger if he is a young man - and insert it into his anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	 And look for the stone inside until you find it under your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	 And turn it little by little until it is in the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	 Then press on it with your finger, and push it out towards the outside parts through the place where you cut.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	 And order the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; and order another assistant to extend the knees upwards with their right hand, and with their other hand pull the cord that is below the knees, in the place where the cut is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And then interpose a spatula, of which this is the form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	 and cut in it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle, but closer to the lower part of the left hip; and let the section be on that stone, and your finger should be in the anus, and let the cut be transverse, so that the opening outside is wide and inside narrow according to how much of the stone can be removed without causing damage, and no more, because if you press too hard with your finger that is in the anus, the stone will come out easily.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	 And know that there are some stones which have angles and edges, which makes their removal difficult.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	 And those like this resemble a bean, are round, and make for easy removal.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	 Therefore, if it is the type with angles and edges, insert into the cleft.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	 And if it cannot be removed that way, then you must contrive something over it, or press something on it with a suitable tool, the tip of which should be like a file with which you can grind on the stone without it breaking; or insert a fine instrument with a curved tip underneath it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	 But if you cannot do so on that one, then widen the opening slightly. And if you see a flow of blood, cut it strongly with dissolved vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	 But if the stone is more than one, then at first you should insert your hand into the mouth of the bladder and cut it out; then you should make a small incision nearby; and similarly act if there are more than two stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	 And if the stone is very large, it is unwise to cut it with a large incision, because two things may happen to the patient: either death or continuous dripping of urine, because the area may not be completely healed.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	 But arrange to expel it while it is still fresh, or contrive to break it with forceps so that you can extract the pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	 Therefore, once you have completed your operation, fill the wound with powdered aloe and dragon's blood, and press it firmly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	 And place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil of roses and cold water, over it to help reduce the swelling.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	 And then make the patient lie on their side, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	 And when that swelling has subsided, soak the area with water and plenty of oil. Then treat it with an ointment called diaphycon and another called diabaseilon until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	 But if in the wound an abscess forms that is tense and corrosive, and it appears as if the blood in the bladder is congealed, which prevents urination (and this is known by the presence of blood in the urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains, it will cause the bladder to become corrupt and the patient to putrefy.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and with opposition to all kinds of spices, using what is appropriate for their healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	 And during all the hours of treatment, you should lift both the cushions and adjust the medicines placed on the wound.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if the stone is small and in the urethra, and it is stuck there, and urination is blocked, then treat it with water that I recommended earlier before it becomes too dry, because excessive drying from this treatment has been accused of causing dryness; and I have experimented with this, and what you should do is take a drill made of soft iron, which looks like this:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	 "From an acute, triangular projection, placed in a stick.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	 "Then take thread and tie it to the rod, placing a weight beneath so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	 "Then insert the iron into the rod, piercing until the piercer reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	 "And turn the piercer with your hand in that stone little by little, and you will pierce its opening until you make it penetrate on the other side; because the urine is immediately released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	 "Then press your hand over the hole that has been made on the side of the stone outside the rod, because it is blocked and plugged with urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	 "But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents it, then tie a thread under the stone and another thread on top of the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	 "Then place between the two ties on the rod over the stone.
E aprop extratz aquela.	 "Then remove that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	 "Then untie the bandage and clean the congealed blood, which is in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	 "And it is not necessary to bandage with thread under the stone, only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other bandage on top only, because when the thread is untied near the edge of the stone, the chain returns to its place and covers the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	 And for this reason it is necessary for you to raise the sheet above them, lifting the bedding over the parts, or return to your task, and cover the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	 Capítulo LXI (Chapter 61).
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	 On the Extraction of Stones from Women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	 Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	 However, if stones occur in any of them, then its cure is difficult and is forbidden by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	 One reason is that the woman must be very strong (or determined).
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	 And the second reason is that you cannot find a woman who is learned enough to reveal herself to the doctor when she is chaste or has no husband.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	 The third reason is that you cannot find a woman who is very skilled in this art, especially for operations by hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	 And the fourth reason is that the place of incision for stones in women is far from the place of the stone, which requires a preliminary incision, and this involves fear (or risk). ️
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	 However, if necessity forces you to do so, then it is necessary for you to take a very learned midwife, and few are found. ️
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	 Based on the context and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation:
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	 Therefore, if you find it, cut it off from under its skin, and then instruct the patient to urinate onto it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	 But if she is not a virgin, then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and still press on the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compress it with good pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	 Therefore, if you find it, then you should gradually push it out of the bladder opening towards the lower abdomen with the help of your skill until it reaches the level of the pelvis.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	 Then press down on the top of the vagina to the level of the pelvis, wherever it may be blocked, and place the stone in that area, and do not remove your finger from the stone while cutting underneath it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	 And at first the incision should be small; and then introduce the razor into that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to the size you know the stone will be expelled from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	 And you should know that the types of stones are many: for there are few and large, smooth and rough, long and round, and with furrows.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	 Therefore, you should know how many spices are from him based on what you indicate about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 And if you see blood flow, place powdered vitriol on the spot and leave it there for an hour until the bleeding is stopped. Then return to your operation to ensure the stone is completely removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	 And make sure you have prepared with yourself the instruments mentioned in the removal of stones from men, so that you are assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	 And if you see blood flow and know that the bleeding is from an artery that has been cut, then place powder on the spot and press it with wool and a bandage, and do not remove this; leave the stone and do not extract it, for soon the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	 Then care for the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 Therefore, after the bleeding has stopped and some days have passed, you should return to your operation to ensure that the stone is completely removed.
Capitol lxii.	 Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	 On making an incision for an inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	 A hydrocele is nothing more than an accumulation of fluid in the white sac that remains outside the testicle containing the semen, and it is called a sac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	 And the cause of this hernia is weakness that occurs in the testicles, because this material is infiltrated into them, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow on the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	 And this humidity has various colors, because its color can be either yellowish, reddish, bloody, black and foul-smelling, or watery white, with the latter being most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	 And the signs by which one knows that this accumulation of water is present are these: because if it is in the white cyst that we have mentioned, then the abscess is round and slightly elongated like an egg, and the testicle appears, since the humidity contains that part from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	 And if the humidity is in the proper fatty tissue, then the abscess is round with an egg-like division and therefore it is believed to be another egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	 And if the humidity is between the sack of the testicles and the white cyst, then act as if it does not exist.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	 And if you want to know the color of the humidity, then test the color of the humidity in the abscess with a small piece of cloth whose shape is preceded; and judge what is inside according to what appears on the cloth's trace.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	 Sure, let's translate this line by line:
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	 This line translates as:
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	 And then sit on the left side of the patient, and command an assistant to stand at the right side of the patient, who should extend his arm towards one of two sides, at the base of the genitals and the beginning of the groin.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	 And then take a spatula, cut the scrotum from the middle part as deep as you can near the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	 And then perform the section according to the rule, equally distant from the line you should draw along the scrotum, until it reaches the white cord (vas deferens).
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	 And cut it, and observe, and be careful not to cut through it; and your incision with which you cut should be suspended with the most and most delicate instrument according to the size possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	 And then pierce the white cord full of water with a wide puncture, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	 And then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps and extend the cord to its ends above; and do not touch the scrotum enclosing the genitals, and cut the cord in whatever manner is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	 And cut it with its entirety or in pieces, and especially its thin side, because if you do not examine the incision carefully, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	 And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary to cut the vessels that are on the ligaments, and extract the egg, and then cure it with what we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	 But if the water is added in two equal parts, then know that there are two hernias. Therefore, incise that part just as you did with the other one; and if it appears to be one operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	 And then you clean the blood, and place between the cuts wool soaked in oil or rosemary-infused oil; and put another piece of wool soaked in wine and oil outside, and spread it over two thin cloths and the navel area. Then cover all this with a doubled cloth and bandages, and tie them securely following this manner:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	 And then take two cloths and soak them in wool like this; make the edges with which you press tightly with cotton or wet wool, and add them securely in the groin area of the breeches, and one of the ends should go from the buttocks to the back, and the second one should go to the scrotum, and two more ends below and two others on the thighs, and all this binding should be tied securely in the groin area of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	 And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of cutting with iron; it is that you take a subtle knife-shaped cautery and that you incise with it the neck of the scrotum, and it is ignited according to what we have counted until the white thread containing the water is discovered, and then you take a cautery of this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	 And it resembles a Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	 Then you perforate with that thread and heat until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	 Then you extend the thread with scissors, scrape it with scissors, and scrape it with a heated subtle cautery; and incise that as much as possible until everything is eradicated; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	 And know that this operation is safer and less prone to bleeding, and better than an operation with cutting.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	 But if you encounter an abscess during the cutting or during the cautery, or bleeding, then you should treat the contrariety according to what is appropriate for it, with a cure that is suitable for it as stated.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	 But if the patient is weak and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then you should perform a perforation as I instruct here; and it is when you are certain, because of what we have said about the signs, that this hernia contains water.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	 Based on the provided context and the pattern of translation you've started, here is my attempt at translating the given sentence:
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	 And it is necessary to open a wide passage so that all the water can flow through.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	 And then place cotton over the area, tie it down and leave it there to allow the remaining water to drain out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 And then treat that (area) until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	 But if there is resistance to the egress of water at that time, you puncture it: and this is done only because the white skin in the orifice of the wound causes resistance and prevents the discharge of water. Therefore, you should insert into the wound a weight or instrument with which water is extracted from dropsical patients, as described previously; or attach to the surface of the wound a small vessel.  (Note: "dropiscal" refers to an accumulation of fluid in the body)
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	 And know that the water will return, and it should be drained again after about six months or a year; and when it accumulates again, then it should be punctured in the same manner, because the patient will continue to have this condition.
Capitol .lxiii.	 Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	 On incising a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	 Know that in incising this fleshy hernia there is the risk of losing it to destruction in the major dispositions; therefore, I have seen its release and being saved by that which is better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	 And I remember the procedure for that and the types of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	 Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in the bodies of those whose humors are not well-balanced, and this happens for various reasons: either due to an acute and bitter excess of humor that has penetrated the humors, or due to a blow.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	 And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the body, and it is not found in pain; this is a serious abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	 And if the abscess is hard and has a dark color, there is no feeling of it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	 And sometimes it is caused by the constriction of blood vessels, or by inflammation to the point that its memory can be perceived, or by inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	 However, what is caused by the inflammation of blood vessels can be recognized by the dispersal of the abscess when it is pressed with the fingers; and one should not touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	 But that which is caused by inflammation of a vein does not disperse due to any cause, except for the compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	 And it is possible that on this type of abscess an incision can be made, as well as on other flesh; and this is done by making an incision in the skin, then spreading the egg-like substance over the parts, and extracting the white from it, and freeing the suspenders of the vessels, and tying them off, and making an incision in the suspenders after you have freed it from all parts of the egg.  (Note: The text appears to be describing a surgical procedure for lancing an abscess.)
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	 Therefore, if the egg has already been consolidated with those meats, then it is necessary that you extract the egg and inject this one.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	 And if there is an adhesion due to any cause of scarring, or between the bowel loops, then it is necessary that you remove all that adhesion and inject this one with a round syringe.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	 But if it is a growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind, then it is necessary that you inject everything that comes from it, and extract the egg as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Therefore, once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and then treat it with another treatment until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	 Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	 About the treatment of a hernia that is caused by wind.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	 Wind is a swelling wrapped in some wrapping similar to a bud with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult exercise and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	 And in the treatment of this illness, fear is aroused by that which is recalled beforehand.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	 Nevertheless, it is necessary to say operation on that one according to what the first ones did.  (This sentence is a bit confusing and could have multiple interpretations. The phrase "empero cove que diguam" can be translated as "nevertheless, it is necessary to say")
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	 And I say that it is necessary to place the patient on an elevated chair; then remove the suspenders of the testicles from below; and take the tail of the genitals with your hands and place them between the thighs; and have another assistant hold those, and extend them with great force.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	 Then cut transversely with a sharp knife through the right side of the vessels until the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	 Then scrape all around as we have told you in the extraction of arrowheads that are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	 Then insert a needle with a double thread into those [wounds], and tie it at the first place where you see life, and tie it again at the last [place].
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	 Then cut those [wounds] straight down the middle according to the length of the body, and extract what has accumulated of the foul and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	 Then treat the wound with a treatment for other wounds in which you want sanity to be generated, so that the vessels do not swell up and block one of the two testicles, because it is not bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Capitol .lxv.	 Sure, I can help with that. However, without the full text of "Capitol .lxv." it's a bit challenging to provide an accurate translation. Could you please share the entire content or at least more of the passage? This will allow me to understand the context better and provide a more precise translation.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	 "On the treatment of intestinal hernias.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	 The occurrence of this hernia is due to a dryness that extends over the abdomen from the groin to the navel, because some of the intestines protrude from that opening.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	 And this rupture is either of the groin or the navel, and these two types occur for various reasons: a blow, a fall, a loud noise, an intense emotion, or a similar cause.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	 And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the groin, is that it occurs gradually over a long period and does not happen suddenly; it is like an abscess formed within the belly because the groin presses on the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	 And the sign of it is when it is due to dryness of the groin, because at first it causes sudden and severe pain; it appears as a different kind of swelling below the navel, which is due to the protrusion of the intestine and its body being exposed outside the groin.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	 And sometimes, the peritoneum is included with the intestine, and this type of hernia is called an inguinoscrotal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	 And sometimes it is caused by flatulence, and sometimes a tear occurs in the intestine, which becomes trapped there, and this is very dangerous for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressure is applied.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	 And in treating this disease with iron, there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid burning in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	 And the manner of performing this operation is to instruct the patient to return the intestine with their hand to the inner parts of its cavity if they obey the command, and then place your fingers under their chin, lifting their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	 Then place the scrotum, which is the scrotum of the testicles, on top, and cut the scrotum entirely along its length; then insert two needles into the lips of the incision, as needed, to open the incision with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	 And if the opening is such that it is possible to pass an egg through it.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	 Then remove that scrotal skin which remains below the testicular sac until the white hard sac is revealed from each side.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	 Then insert your finger into that which is the testicle, between the white sac, which remains under the scrotal sac, and between the two sacs, and release with it the adhesion that is in the back of the egg.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	 Here's the translation of the provided text:
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	 "And seek with your fingers that there be no cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white, hard sheet.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	 "But if you find any cause of it, then remove that to the stomach.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	 "Then take a needle with a thread of thickness made of ten threads, and insert it under the back part of the sheet which is below the ligament of the testicles, which should be a section; then cut the ends which protrude from the thread until they are four threads long, and then place some of them over each other in the form of a cross. And tie with that the sheet we mentioned earlier, which is below the ligament of the testicles, tightly with two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	 "Then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them securely so that none of the vessels that nourish those can transmit any cause, so that an inflamed abscess does not occur from this.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	 "And place another ligature a little distance from the first ligature, about three fingerbreadths; and then leave these two ligatures on the sheet which is below the ligament of the testicles to the size of one's thumb, and cut off everything else that remains in a round shape, and remove the egg.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	 And then cut into the area below the cord of the testicles, so that blood and pus flow out as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	 And then administer wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and apply the bandage that we have recommended (and sometimes a white cloth is cauterized, which we have said near the incision to prevent bleeding, because many times this happens). Leave the bandage until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	 But if its healing is delayed, then dip it in hot water and place it on the area until it falls off, as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 Then treat the wound with the other treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	 Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	 About hernias that are swollen or filled with air.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	 In this type of hernia, it is not recommended to treat it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	 And the first (doctors) said that it is treated in the same way as we have recommended for hernias with blood vessels; which is to tie the vessels near the incision gently; and then dry in the middle of the area around the swelling with hot water until the vessels fall off.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	 And treat the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	 Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	 About the dislocation that occurs in the joints.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	 Sometimes a dislocation occurs in the joints as we have said, and swelling appears at the site.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	 Do not attribute any cause to the intestines in the case of the patient; and if they do, it is little; and it returns in all cases.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	 But if the time is prolonged with this, there is a fixed fissure in the intestines until the intestine descends into the intestines; and this happens due to the extension of the intestines which is in the joints as we have said, the cause of which is that the intestines are extended, and then it becomes softened and the site becomes inflamed and swollen.  (Note: The repetition of "ciphac" should be corrected to "intestines")
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	 And its treatment is with a cautery as was previously mentioned in the account.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	 And sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then dry the site of the dislocation swelling with a cut along its length according to the quantity of three times.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	 And then strengthen the white ribbon that is under the hood until it is revealed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	 And then take the needle and place it over the prominent part of the ribbon, and press it against the stomach's wall.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	 And then sew together the two prominent ends of the ribbon with a stitch, securing one end to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	 And then extract the remaining part of the ribbon, and do not cut all of it from the hood, nor stretch the opening, or any other similar cause as I will explain to you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	 And then treat it with the wound dressing method, and after cutting the threads, cleanse the area and heal the wound until it is healed; because the hood is constricted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	 Cauterization is better in this case, as it is more likely to be effective.
Capitol .lxviii.	 Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	 Of the softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	 Often the scrotum of the testicles is softened in some men because the flesh within it becomes softened, and its guarding is diminished.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	 And if you wish, in the beginning soften the excess of the cord with three or four cookings and secure it firmly with a stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	 Then cut between the stitches; then treat for the healing of the other diseases until it is healed and the threads fall off.
Capitol .lxix.	 Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	 Of Castration
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	 Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but I have heard of it being done and will mention it here in this book; and the reason for mentioning it is twofold: one is so that it may be known to doctors when they are asked about it, that they know the treatment for those to whom it happens; and the other reason is that sometimes we need castration of other animals for our benefit from them, such as with bulls, goats, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	 And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by traction or by incision and section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	 But in that which is done by traction, the way of the operation is to make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles are softened and lengthened and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	 And then take those with your hand inside so that they are resolved and do not appear after touching them.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	 But in the case of castration done by cutting and slicing, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	 Then tie the suspensory ligaments, and make an incision over each testicle with a single cut until two testicles are processed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	 And then cut those that you will have skinned.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	 And do not leave anything on those of the scrotum for any reason, except for a thin layer that is over the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	 And this method of castration is better when done by crushing, because crushing firmly removes any cause of the testicles so that the animal no longer desires mating.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 Then care for the wound until it heals.
Capitol .lxx.	 Chapter .70
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	 On the care of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	 Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when there is an opening where the scrotum should be, between the two testicles, in which a female organ appears with pubic hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	 And sometimes from that pain, urine is expelled which is in the tail of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	 But in women, it is of a certain kind: and that is that the vulva of the woman on the pubis is like two male testicles, a little smaller at the external part, just like the male foreskin with two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	 And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	 And it is necessary that you press those tightened flesh until the pressure of that pain dissipates, and then treat them with the remedy for other diseases.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	 And in the second kind of men, from which urine is expelled that is in the tail of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for him.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	 Of swelling and prominent flesh due to female causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	 A strong swelling is bound by natural causes until it is pressed and care is taken; and sometimes in some women, it becomes so prominent that it spreads as in men and reaches during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	 Therefore, you should hold the excess swelling with your hand or a compress and press it down.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	 And do not ultimately press, especially in the region of the ribs, so that it does not cause bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	 And then care for it with a remedy for wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	 However, flesh born is flesh that is born in the horrible manner of the mother until it fills her, and weakly exits to the outer parts according to its appearance (and for this reason some first called it "tailed illness"). Therefore, we must press it like a leech, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	 Chapter .72
De curacio de alratica.	 On the treatment of herpes (or shingles).
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	 Herpes is when the woman's vagina is not perforated, or is very narrow.
E es o natural o accidental.	 And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	 An accidental herpes is due to previous illness, and this can be caused by inadequate flesh or subtle and dense fat.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	 And it can occur in the region of the mother's womb, or on her hips, or on the upper part of her, or on the lower part of her. It is forbidden to have intercourse and conception and childbirth, and greatly forbidden during menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	 And the recognition of that is done by examining the womb. If it appears swollen, then it is certain; but if not, you should search for it with your fingers or with a ray [of light].
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	 But if the swelling is subtle and close to both lips, then you cut and disrupt it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	 And [you] place [your fingers] on the two lips of the vulva, and then place your thumbs together on both sides at the same time.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	 And the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread, and then you spread both lips with force until that subtle swelling is broken open and the swelling is revealed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	 And then you take wool, drench it in oil and place it on the area, and have someone stay with her for the day to prevent the cut from healing too quickly.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	 But if the swelling is large and thick, then you should cut it with a lancet or with a leaf of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	 But if the swelling is due to an abscess, then suspend it with a hook, and cut it open.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	 And with you should be the medicines that stop bleeding without causing pain, such as agrimony, dragon's blood, and henna, mixed with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	 And then administer a wide lead tube so that the wound is not easily closed.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	 And keep it for some days and apply a dry compress to it.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	 And then treat it with the other healing method of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	 And sometimes it happens during the birth of other children, and then you should proceed according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	 But if it is due to cancerous abscesses, then do not oppose the abscess in the mother with iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	 Chapter 73
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	 Of the care for hemorrhoids and tail, and red boils that occur in the vulva of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	 Hemorrhoids are the outlets of many veins, from which blood flows continuously; and when they are old hemorrhoids, they become thin.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	 And I have already said in the division the types of those and the signs of those, and I will say which ones receive treatment and which ones do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	 Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and thin ones, when they are in the womb of the mother and do not appear to the senses, then do not treat them with iron. ️
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	 But those that are in the womb of the mother, on which sensation is felt, are those that are healed.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	 And you should place the woman in a cold environment and then extend her limbs with scissors or rough cloth, and cut those [fetuses] with the razor.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	 And then sprinkle on those [fetuses] the flow of blood from one of the powdered herbs that have no bitterness, such as anise and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	 And then wrap the patient's feet for an hour, and then place her in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	 And if the flow of blood persists, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peels, and walnuts and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	 And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a paste with water on the patient's back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	 And if the blood has stopped, it is good; and if not, make it coagulate with two cupping glasses, and at the breasts without scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then take wool and soak it with the juice of coriander or with the juice of wild marjoram or with the juice of lavender with strong vinegar, and make it adhere to the area; and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	 "However, the one who is of sharp judgment must ensure that you write down what appears to you according to what I have said above in this language.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "And care for him until he is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	 "Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	 "The perforation of the intestine happened in the mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	 "Many types of abscesses occurred in the mother, such as cramp, lap indent, ulcer, adhubelat, herpetomas, fistulas emorroyas, raguarrias, thyll, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	 "And I have already mentioned these illnesses and the types of them and their signs and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	 "And I should speak in this treatise about the abscess that comes in the mother when it is one of the abscesses that collects pus, and if you want to know how its operation is done with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	 "Therefore, you should consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp with throbbing and fever, and if you see it reddening and feel heat on it, then do not cut it with perforation, and care for it with what helps in maturation until the sharpness of the incidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	 Based on the context and the language used in the previous lines, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	 And then the midwife follows the path of the right and left labia, using the instrument with which she has opened the orifice of the mother, whose form will be described in the following cases.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	 And when you want to administer this instrument, place it along the pubic bone of the mother and ensure that only a small part of the instrument enters the mother's body, just enough to reach the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	 However, if the instrument is larger than the pubic bone of the mother, then place cloths on top of the pubic bone to prevent any part of the instrument from entering the mother's body.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	 And it is necessary that you place the thread running along the length of the instrument on the left side, and have the person administering the instrument hold it while turning the thread until the mother's orifice is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	 And when the birth appears, and it is touched by hand and is slippery and wet, then it is necessary that you dry off its head with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	 And when the placenta is expelled, then it is necessary that you place a cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil with some healing properties on the wound and apply pressure to the pubic bone of the mother.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	 E place outside the mother and over the pillow clean wool soaked in water in which mallows are boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 And it should be treated for about two days with an ointment that is suitable to use until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	 And sometimes the mother and the wound are washed in this way: they are crystallized with water and honey, and then with water in which is boiled the root of lily or of long aristolochia, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	 And if the wound is deep in the mother's flesh, then it is necessary that you be forbidden from treating him with iron, having care of that with water as we said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	 Chapter .75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	 To teach the midwives in what manner the swollen breasts are to be treated when they come out according to a non-natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	 It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of a natural birth by its signs, and that when you see the woman expelling from the sides and desiring to smell the air, and above that she is relieved because of what comes out of her during childbirth, and she hastens the exit of the breast, then know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and it is the exit of it over its head, and the second one with that or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	 When you see those signs, it is necessary to press the patient's abdomen so that the baby descends slightly. As soon as it rests on its head, give the patient a second dose, and it is cleaned of those excesses with good cleaning.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	 However, that which is the other part is unnatural and unpraiseworthy, for when the baby exits through its feet and the body of the baby comes out in front of its head and its feet, or one hand of the baby, either at its foot, or the head of the baby with its hands comes out at its stomach, and quickly it is converted on its neck, and it resembles the unpraiseworthy figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	 Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these matters, and to guard against errors and deceptions.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	 And I am showing all the figures of those, and what is contained in them, so that it may be indicated by this and may be stated thusly.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	 When the foot comes out first by natural difficulty, and it is very hard on the woman and becomes difficult for her, and sometimes the virtue of the woman is already weakened, then she should perform this procedure, or what the women have him do, and evaporate his head with a fenugreek-based potion and moist oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	 And then insert the midwife's small spatula between her legs and separate with it the second membrane, or cut that one with her nail until the water comes out from inside it.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	 And press on the woman's belly until the baby is expelled.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	 But if it does not come out, then the woman must be anointed with little mucilage and fenugreek mucilage with scissors.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	 And then order her, quickly anoint her, and make her cough with conditions; and hold her mouth and nose for one hour, because the baby will be born soon after.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	 And if both hands of the baby have already come out at first, then it is necessary that you push them back little by little with gentleness.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	 But if it does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and quickly turn the chair over on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall because of the shock.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	 And if the hands are not turned back inside and the baby dies, then incise those [hands] and extract the membrane of the baby or tie its body to its hand with a cloth and extract it equally, because that will be born soon after.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	 About the discharge of the fetus from the mother's body.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	 When the baby comes out onto the mother's feet, you should then pull it up towards you, and then turn the baby so that its face is facing downwards, and then take one of its feet and gently pull it out, little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	 But as soon as it has come out into the space between the legs, then command it to expel itself, and make her cough with care, because it will be a boy if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	 And if it is not a boy as we have said, then you should return the baby little by little until you place it in the natural position, because it will be a boy with an easy birth.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	 And if it is prevented by all that we have said, then take some powder of althea and dissolved gum, and pound them well in the mortar, and then anoint the woman's vulva with it, as low as her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	 And then make her sit in warm water, until she reaches the hips.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	 And when you see that the parts coming out of her are softened, then make for her a smoke bath with myrtle and place it under her.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	 When you perform sublimation fumigation for an hour, then make the patient lie down on a bed of coals, and then induce sneezing and open his mouth, and remove that, and apply light pressure to the lowest part of his abdomen, because it will cause immediate defecation.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	 Likewise, expel the feces from its passages and clean its hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	 When the feces are expelled in this manner, then gradually introduce your smallest finger; and then have the woman sit on her heels, with her feet hanging down, and those should be resting on a light material, and close her hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	 Then gradually press on the lower part of her abdomen until what is beneath her feet and ears has been expelled and is ready in the lowest part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	 And if the feces have not been expelled, then take her feet and move them vigorously, and then gradually press on what is above the hypochondria until the feces reach the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	 Then gradually introduce your hand and pull out the feces little by little, and command the woman to press until the feces have been expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	 Certainly! Let's break down this sentence:
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	 Here's my translation of the provided text:
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	 And if he cannot walk, then make him lie down on the bed, and shake his body vigorously, and immediately apply poultices which I have recommended from mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	 And if the childbirth has arrived, then make that woman sit on a chair, and immediately study the reduction of the hand, and place the fetus according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and command her to press inward until it is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	 Similarly, with the child on his back, spread out his hands and place him facing his mother's back.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	 Let the midwife hold the child’s hand and then gradually turn that little one to her side, making it easier for them.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	 And when and as soon as the child is turned, then place on his hip what we have recommended from oil and mucilage.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	 And then command her to move slowly little by little, and when you have done this, then make her sit on a chair and command her to lean over the right side, and then command her to press down; and make her sneeze with caution.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	 The expulsion of the fetus is prepared on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	 When it is time to remove the placenta according to this method, consider doing so. And then you slice through the uterus with your fingernail until it is emptied of fluid.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	 And if the child is suspended by its face and neck, then you should cut the umbilical cord to prevent it from being strangled and dying.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	 And then you should carefully extract the child from within until you place it in an appropriate position, and instruct the woman to breathe deeply several times. The child will be expelled gently with this method, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	 Birth of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	 Know that twins are born in many instances, and sometimes three or four [at once], but this is rare and unfortunate; however, there are natural causes for this, not evil ones.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And count them, whether they are multiplied or not, as one afterbirth. They are separated by the navel string in each of those and sometimes they are expelled like a single child through natural gentle birth, and sometimes they are expelled through unnatural birth as we have mentioned earlier.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	 And if the midwife is skilled and does this with ease and skill, and with patience, and is inventive according to every shape as it has been prepared by the mind leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	 And remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	 Sometimes in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten are formed. I have verified that a woman has aborted and given birth to six, and another ten, all fully formed, and this was caused by the measurement of the glorious wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	 And all this should be in the knowledge of the midwife, for she must pay close attention to that small appearance, and therefore attend to it as needed.
Capitol .lxxvi.	 Chapter 76
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	 On the extraction of the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	 When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it has not yet exited, and you are forced to use operation with your hand, then you must consider if the woman is of sound virtue and is not with any of the accidents for which her loss is feared.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	 Then it is necessary for the woman to be placed on her left side, with her head inclined downward and her hips raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	 Based on the pattern of the previous translation, here is a line-by-line attempt to translate the given sentence:
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	 And then you moisten the mouth of his mother with oils and mucilage of flaxseed, fenugreek, and linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	 And then you anoint the midwife's hand with those oils and mucilages, and then insert her hand gently into the mother, and then search with her hand for the place where the nails are located in the womb.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	 And in this case: then consider if the child is ready to be born with its head first; then place the nails in his heels, or in his neck, or in his mouth, or on his palate, or under his chin, or on his collarbone, or near the ribs, or under the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	 But if the delivery is with his feet first, then in the heel, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	 And it is necessary that you hold the nails with your right hand, and place the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand gently and place the nails in one of those places which we have mentioned, until it reaches the cause of its discomfort.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	 And then place and put in the position of it another nail, or a third if necessary, so that there is equal attraction and not just extension according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	 Based on the pattern of the provided translation and the context of medieval medical treatises, here's my best guess for the translation:
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	 And it is necessary in the patient that between them the extension be softened; and if some part of him is retained, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert those skillfully and move with those things that are retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	 Therefore, if the part of the baby is forgotten, then the fingers should be rearranged in the place where it is more outside; and do this until the entire baby is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	 But if the hand comes out before the other and it is not possible to reduce it because of the baby’s narrowness, then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped around it; and then extract it until all of it is delivered, and cut it either at the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	 And you should do the same for the other hand and for both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 But if the head of the baby is large, or there is difficulty in delivery, or there is water retained in the head, then it is necessary to insert between the fingers a thin spatula and split the head and extract the water, or discover that with an instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will come with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	 Based on the context provided and the pattern of the text, here's a line-by-line translation:
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	 And if the head is swollen and constricted, you must make an incision so that the humidity in the feet is released.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	 Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	 "And if the abdomen of the patient is swollen or they are suffering from dropsy, then it is necessary to pierce that place to release the moisture within.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	 "But if the foot is on their own feet, then the attraction of it is light and the direction towards the mother's mouth is also light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	 "But if the abdomen and feet are constricted, then it is necessary for you to extract that with a cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and split open the abdomen and the feet until water runs out from them.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	 "But if the other limbs are removed and the head is turned back, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, then she should insert her hand into the womb, and with it seek the head, and draw that with these words towards the mother's mouth. And then she should insert one or two fingers into the child, and pull it with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	 "And if the mother's mouth is constricted by swelling that occurs in her, then it should not be opened up; instead, it is necessary to administer a lavage of fatty and moist substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	 And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	 And if the wound is on his side, then, if possible, it should be cauterized: and the treatment mentioned for a living person should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	 And if that is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and removed.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	 And one should ensure that no cause remains inside the second layer of skin.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	 And when you have completed all your operations, then administer the treatment that we have mentioned for the care of wounds which occur from a mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	 And if there is a flow of blood, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	 And I have seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and another live one pressed against it, and the other fetus is also dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	 It happened to him that he had a long-standing abscess in his navel; and it swelled inside until it burst open, and he began to pass arms.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	 And I was called to care for him, and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	 Based on the pattern of the previous translations and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation:
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	 And then I thought that they were of the bones of the dead man.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	 And then I examined the wound, and extracted from him some bones, the woman who was in her thousandth condition, and had lived thus for a long time, ran away from him with a little of his arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	 And I did not find this to be strange, because in this there is skill and assistance for what the doctor can do with his hand for treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	 Of the shapes of the instruments that are necessary to extract the body.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	 Shape of the inverted cup with which it is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	 This is the shape of the stretcher on which the books are cut, and at this cutting there are two cups at the ends of two legs.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	 However, this cup should be more subtle than narrower, and it should be made either from ebony or boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	 And the width of each leg should be two fingers and the margin of each also two fingers, and the length of each is one and a half palms; and in the middle of the two legs there are two joints of the same wood which are already fixed, whose length is half a palm plus a little, and the width of each is about two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	 And these two additional things should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that she can open with them when you turn both prescribed wheels.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	 Another similar shape, but more subtle and lighter.
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	 It should be made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	 However, at the end of it there are two similar additions, and the length of these additions is about a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	 And when you want to open the mother with these, then have the woman lie down on her back with her feet hanging off the edge, and open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	 And then open your hand with the instrument in the same way as you do with forceps, according to the amount you want of the opening of the mother's mouth until the midwife does what she wants.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	 The form of the wheel which the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	 Form for pushing with which the child is pushed out.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	 Form of friendship, with which the large head is confined
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	 And it is similar to forceps, with teeth at the end, as seen before, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as seen before, with teeth like saw teeth with which it is cut and confined.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	 It looks like there was an issue with displaying the full text of the source sentence. Could you please provide the complete sentence again? I'd be happy to help translate it.
Forma de unci havent una spina:	 "Forma" in this context appears to mean "way" or "manner." "Unci" seems to be a misspelling of "uncy," which likely refers to the scapula (shoulder blade) or a similar part of the body. "Havent" is related to "having" and "una spina" means "a thorn.
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	 "Forma of a salve having two needles:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	 "A form of forceps with teeth of wax, with which the head of the child is to be covered:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	 "Forma of a spoon having two ends with which the head is separated:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	 "Forma of two wide spoons:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	 "All these instruments are practiced, and the more varied and prepared they are by the craftsmen, the lighter their operation becomes and more beneficial to men in quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	 "And you should not lack any of those instruments wherever you are, because the need for them is not negligible.
De extraccio de la segondina.	 "On the extraction of the placenta.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	 "When the placenta is retained after childbirth, then you should command the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze by pinching [her nose], and strengthen your hand over her mouth and her nostrils, and if it comes out this way, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	 "And if not, then you take a cup and make a hole in the cover, and place in it burning herbs such as calament, rue, anise, chamomile, Arabian mastic, cinnamon wood, and St. John's wort.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	 And then place a reed cannula in the mouth of the mother, and hold it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	 And then make her sneeze as we said before, and the second wind will be expelled with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	 But if this treatment persists and does not work, then you should order the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or a mixture of althea, and then insert it into the vagina and search for the second wind with it. When you have found it, take hold of it and extract it little by little. But if it is attached to the womb of the mother, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the second wind, extract it little by little according to the correct method so that the mother does not suffer a violent contraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	 It is necessary for the ribs on the right and left sides to be easily moved.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	 And then the amount of attraction should be adjusted, because she will obey and evacuate from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	 And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with snuffing and a medicine made from oil with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	 Sure, let's translate the provided text line by line:
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	 Sure, let's break down the text line by line:
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	 "However, some of the ancients have already tried fumigation with juniper and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	 "The form of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated for retained menstrual blood and afterbirth is as follows:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	 "It should be made of glass or iron.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	 "And the thin end should be placed in the woman's vagina while the wider end is held over the fire, with the fumigation being done over the coals of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	 "And this should be repeated until that fumigation is completely consumed and another one is added.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	 "About the treatment for a non-ruptured childbirth.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 "If a child is born and its membranes are not ruptured, which is called a thin and delicate birth.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	 "Then it is necessary for the midwife to rupture those membranes with her finger; if not, she should rupture them with a sharp spoon, taking care not to touch the navel.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	 "And then place on it wool soaked in wine and oil; and then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	 "But if you fear that it is delicate, then insert a tube into the opening for several days, and remove it when the child wants to urinate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	 And if an abscess occurs on the buttocks due to the solidification of a wound or an aposteme (a swelling caused by infection); then it is necessary that this solidification be cut open, and afterwards it should be treated with the water we have mentioned for treatment and healing.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	 Of the treatment of fistulas that occur below (in the lower parts of the body).
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	 The fistulas that occur in the lower parts of the body are called nodes and are quite large, which usually occur near the buttocks on the outside or in the space between the thighs.
E es una fistula o motas.	 And it is a fistula or abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	 And when this node is old and exudes white, watery fluid or fine pus, and sometimes some of these fistulas may penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	 And those penetrating ones are known by the fact that it exits from them by egression and flatulence; and sometimes the patient feels the egression, and then worms exit from them easily.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	 And sometimes some of these fistulas penetrate into the bladder and into the opening of the penis; and sometimes they penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the bone of the knee.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	 Based on the given text and the pattern of translation, here's a line-by-line translation of the new sentence:
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	 If there is swelling in that area, then insert a fine lead probe or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	 And if you do not feel that at all or do not proceed with any cause of obstruction, such as worms or gas, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then proceed to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	 And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the penis, then its indication is the discharge of urine from there and the prevention of it so that the place may be healed with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	 However, if it penetrates into the joint of the hip or into the bone and there is an increase in pain around it, then its sign is that the probe passes through here if there is no swelling within the bone, and there is an increase in pain around the affected area; and that from it comes pus constantly; and that this medicine does not work on it, nor can it be healed with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	 And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure, and the treatment of them is labor and futility of the foolish doctors on whom they are fixed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	 In that case where it is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is expected as I will tell you, and which I have already tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	 And have the patient lie on his back between your hands, with his head raised and legs lifted into the air, the cushions inclined towards his belly, and then carefully insert a lead or silver probe if it is in the fistula area until you know the place where the probe enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	 And if the patient feels pain around the anus, then you should insert your finger in there.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if you feel with your finger the probe already inserted and clearly penetrating by itself, or if you feel between your finger and that a sort of bone or flesh, then you know for certain that it is penetrating; and in that case do not work on it, because there is no healing in it, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	 However, some say that in some men, it heals late.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	 And the medicine by which help is hoped for in him is that you make a subtle cautery iron according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before, and insert that heated iron into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those fleshy fistulas have become joined like a quill of a bird's feather.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	 And then care for it with compresses wrapped in linen until all the adjacent flesh is softened, and then care for it with medicines that promote the growth and healing of the flesh. If it is healed, good; if not, then it is never healed by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	 And if the string enters but does not penetrate into your finger that is in the anus, and there is something between it and the string, such as a piece of flesh or cloth, and sometimes the fistula is visible on the surface of the colon, then dry out the colon from the beginning of the fistula. And you will see that the string dries up with it, and keep doing this until the drying reaches the place where the end of the string can be seen, and through the string it is freed and cut off.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	 And then cleanse those fistulated fleshes which resemble the hollow tube of a bird's quill, and let none of them remain for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	 However, if blood flows when you separate those fleshes from your operation, then it is better to cauterize with fire or sharp medicine, because cauterization with fire has two good effects: it unites the adjacent fleshes and dries up the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	 Here's the translation for the given sentence:
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	 And these are the medicines that have astringent and drying properties; when it is restored, it is already cured and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	 But if the fistula has already penetrated into the flesh of the anus and is extended over the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and inquire with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	 And so if you feel the hole and between you and it is only a thin layer of fat or flesh, and it is near the surface, then do not operate on it but rather trust in faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	 This condition can be treated in one of three ways: either by cauterizing it as we have said; or by drying it out until you reach its cavity, so that you can insert the medicines and appropriate care; and do not proceed with drying alone for fear of incising the ligament containing the anus, and thus causing involuntary expulsion of the feces; and then treat it with the water we have mentioned, for it will soon be healed. Or, by extending that layer and draining that pus, and drying it out near the anus as we have said, either with a probe or another instrument with a sharp point, and then cleanse those fistulized tissues which are in the section where you can do so with a poultice; and then strive to heal the entire wound with dryness. And if the pus-filled openings above are not healed, and the fistula remains open near the anus, it will be easier for the patient to pass feces.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	 And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is located on the side of the buttock around the surface of the body with the cord and on the edge of the buttock, then take a perforated probe with a pointed end, which is like a needle used for preparing hearts in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	 And then insert it wrapped in five threads or around those; and then insert the probe with thread into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	 But if it penetrates into the edge of the buttock deep inside, then you extract the thread from that hole as if you insert your finger into the buttock; and pull out the end of the thread and adjust both ends together, and tighten each one, and leave it like this for a day or two. And when the thread is more deeply embedded in the flesh, tighten it until the flesh between the two ends of the thread comes together and fits well.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	 Then care for the wound until it is healed and cured.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	 But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrated, then make it penetrate in whatever way you are prepared, as long as it is on the surface, for it is not for you to do this so that you do not cut the tendon; and then do with that until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	 Based on the provided sentences and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	 "About the suturing of hemorrhoids from which blood flows during incision.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	 "Hemorrhoids are of two kinds, for either they are like coals in the rectum or those that resemble fatty tissue.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	 "And those are small and large, from which blood flows constantly, either as a single stream or in drops, and they are outside the rectum, on its edges.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	 "However, those that are outside the anus are of two kinds due to lack of moisture, from which flows yellowish water or a small amount of blood with dung continuously, and they vary in color.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	 "And the treatment for those inside the anus is to order the patient to sit and press until the anus protrudes and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	 "Then cut and suspend them with scissors or a hook that you have, and then immediately incise them to their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	 "But if scissors cannot be used on them due to their moisture and softness, then take those with a rough cloth or a piece of cotton or a woolen cloth, and extract them with the said means, and immediately incise them and sprinkle some hot powders over them near the incision, so that they act as cautery; or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 And then cure those [conditions] with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	 And if the feces do not exit, then administer an enema to the patient with an enema that has a small opening, and wash [the patient] with the water that is in the colon and that facilitates slight exit of feces when the patient is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	 But if the hemorrhoids are protruding from the anus, then their cause is light, and it is that you should take them with your finger or with a hook, and push them back in, and then cure them with the water we have mentioned until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	 And he who has pushed in [the hemorrhoids], it is necessary that you administer a suture to them according to this manner: take thread wrapped and insert it into a needle and then draw the hemorrhoids towards the two parts above, and make the needle penetrate with the thread into the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the part below the needle, and transversely; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with a strong ligature, and then knot the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	 And do this to all (the cushions), and leave one out and do not move it, so that the excess blood may flow from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	 And then place on the affected area a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax; place it on the sore and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And then leave that (cloth) there until it dries; and when it is dry, treat the area with ointment or another treatment until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	 On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 Many are caused by excessive dryness or by natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 And when they are old and that medicine does not work, then you must scrape them with the point of a spatula or with your nail until they become moist, and you should cover them with a crust of pus, which prevents consolidation; and then treat them until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 Then remove them with vigorous scraping until the first time they bleed and are raw; and then treat them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	 On the treatment of a sty, which is like a nail.  (A "sty" is a red tender swelling on the eyelid caused by infection.)
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	 Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	 And then it is necessary to cut away what is around the nail, and it should be held with pincers or tweezers, and it should be removed from its root; and then cure that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	 And if you wish, cauterize the following as described in the previous chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	 However, a wart is a small, rough, round, tuberous growth on the surface of the body, and many are seen in children's hands.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	 And the treatment for it is that you should spread and cut it, or you should tighten it with a thread or a hair inside it.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	 And if you wish, cauterize it as we said before, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	 And already they have been removed, both inverted and non-inverted, using the instrument I will describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	 However, a mole is a small, hairy or large tuberous growth on the surface of the body, commonly found on the forehead, and when cold reaches it, it feels like a formicary bite, and it appears around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	 And the treatment for it is that you take a cannula of eagle feather or vulture feather, and it should be strong, and place it over the mole so that it contains the circle of the cannula from its parts; then turn your hand with the cannula until you cut away what is around the mole, and press it on the forehead of the flesh, and remove the mole from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	 And if you wish, do this with a bronze or iron tube according to this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	 And let the opening at the top of the tube be fine and closed (meaning it does not pierce), wrapped so that the sensation on the tongue is softened and the rotation of that [tube].
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	 And if you wish, cauterize the ant according to what was said earlier in the chapter on cautery for athelia.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	 Regarding the forms of the instruments that are administered to give support.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	 Sometimes support is made of silver or lead or melted bronze; and sometimes those instruments are made small and large according to those to whom they are administered, because the one that is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are chapped or painful, their supports should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	 The form of a large support is rare:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	 The top of the tube, in which the bag is tied, should be wide like this; and there should be a separation where the bag is tied, as shown here.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	 And the lower end, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (meaning not open), thin and long; at one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should correspond to the thickness of the rays, and a little wider.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	 And let there be a bag in which the medications of animal bladder or sheepskin are placed, and its length should be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	 And let it [the bag] be punctured by thin tubes in such a way that it is twisted; and if the space between the tubes is equal to the thickness of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	 Then carefully insert into those tubes a strong thread of raw thread, which should be of the same thickness as those threads or wrap them around; and attach to it [the bag] with that [thread]; and when the bag is placed in it [the bladder], tighten the end of the thread between two clips with strong pressure, and then seal each tube with that [thread]: However, the method of sealing with that [thread] is that you fill the bag with the medication, which should be heated according to the patient's tolerance; and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	 Then let the patient be placed on their back, and raise their legs up with a pillow underneath them, as is customary for men or a bolster; then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; then carefully insert it into the rectum; then let the attendant take the bag and squeeze it with both hands and press vigorously until all that is in the bladder has been evacuated into the intestine; then remove the bladder, and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	 And if the medicine forces him to vomit, let it be as much as possible; and if he sleeps with it for an entire night, it is more helpful in healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	 And if you treat him with the remedies for stomach ailments and his vomiting persists, then you should continue to use the cautery until he is cured.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	 And if there are hemorrhoids or painful lumps in the anus, then use a very fine and gentle cautery, like those used to treat infants.
De curacio de las plaguas.	 On the treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	 I have already mentioned in the division of wound treatment what is appropriate for this book, and now I will discuss the treatment of wounds with both hands and medicines according to their nature.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	 Therefore, I say that wounds are classified according to how they were made and the location on which they fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	 And the causes by which many times wounds are made are as follows: cutting with a stone, or incision with a knife or sword, or striking with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to these many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	 But the wounds that are in places of the body are as follows: a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the stomach, or the chest, and similar to these among the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	 "And I am recommending the treatment of certain diseases, so that you may follow this reasoning and rule for other diseases.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	 "And I will begin with simple head diseases, because the memory of compounded ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	 "Therefore I say that when there is a simple head injury and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is caused by the striking of a stone or similar object, and only the membrane has been torn and it is a severe injury and you fear an abscess forming on the patient, then cut and bleed the cephalic vein immediately, and do not delay this; and extract from him as much blood according to his strength, unless there is some reason against bleeding, especially if the blood that has come out of the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	 "And let the bleeding be from the opposite side of the wounded area; and watch that the patient avoids stuffiness, and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	 "But if any reason prevents bleeding, then let the patient be put on a reduced diet and avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	 "And place on the wound, if an abscess forms, a cloth soaked in oil of roses or in wine that has been boiled down.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	 Certainly! Here's the translation of your sentence:
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	 And if the air has already changed in that place, then apply some ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	 However, if the wound is large or deep and the lips of it are not approximated by means of stitches, then approximate them with sutures as I will describe to you about the suturing technique.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	 However, if the wound has already exposed the bone and there is only a small piece of skin remaining, then cut away that piece and treat the wound with medicines to restore the flesh in its place. Command the patient to eat only soft foods such as soup and similar items until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	 And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all the rotten flesh and clean it thoroughly, and then treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	 But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow, and it has not been cut by medicines, then you should look for the artery. And if you find it uncut, then you should cut it with a scalpel or tie it off; and if necessity compels you to do what we have said is not feasible, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	 And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; therefore, you should sprinkle this powder on them, for when it hardens before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	 And the manner of the powder is this: take one part of lard oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unslaked lime; let all be well ground and sieved, and with it fill the wound, and constrict it tightly until it heals well on top, and coagulates with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	 Then bind it firmly above with bandages and leave it thus, without loosening until it is healed, for the medicine will not have been fully drawn from it until it is cured.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	 And sometimes this alone can be done when there is no lard oil or dragon's blood at hand.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	 And perform this same operation on large wounds when it is necessary to cover them and bind them tightly, and recent wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered yet.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 And if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then it is not advisable to use this powder; rather, at that time treat them with the water we mentioned earlier, so that you place on them some digestive unguents, or you can also place on them a paste of wheat flour with water and honey until they form pus; and then treat them with the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	 But if a wound occurs with a bone fracture, and it is small, then you should extract it with a hook.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	 And I will describe the treatment of skull fractures, which is as follows:
De las plaguas del col.	 Of the wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	 But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment from a simple head wound.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	 However, if the nerves of the neck are cut or an artery is severed, then if it is a nerve, there is no remedy for it except to avoid treating it with something that causes very strong constriction, such as ziniar and zegi which is vitriol and similar substances that harm the nerves and contract them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	 And do not place any cauterizing substance on the wound at all, because the substance of the nerves is cold and its continuation is with the brain, which is the coolest part of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	 And if it is treated with light medicines, such as being washed with warm water, sometimes infused in rose oil or non-rose oil, and then bandaged when washed with warm water and the other powders diminishing in this manner, and moistened ointments.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	 "But if the wound is large, then apply stitches or clamp the lips of it, and subsequently treat it with powders until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	 "But if the wound is deep or occurs in the lowest part of the body, then perforate it at its most depressed point.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	 "But if an artery has already been cut in the wound and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry it, or bind it, or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	 "But if the lips of the anus have already been cut or completely, and the veins of the neck have been saved, then close the lips of the anus with a suture over the bone of the anus and do not touch it; first equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and then strengthen it with a decent bandage, and leave it for some days; and then cure it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	 "But if the wound has already been made in the bone, then probe it; and if there are bone fragments, extract all that you can of them; and what is not accessible to you, leave until the wound putrefies, and separates, and the ulceration is relieved.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	 And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	 But if in the wound there is an abscess, then treat it with water of which the memory will come to you shortly in this chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	 Of the wounds of the neck or similar, when made between the shoulders and done with a sword or a dagger or a lance or something similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	 If it is a strike from a lance or dagger, and you see its depth, then consider also if there is any hissing sound when the patient breathes; in that case, know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	 And if there is not much depth and the wound is recent with its own blood, then in the first hour sprinkle on it powder, and do not constrict it so that the blood is not held in its depth and returns to the heart and kills the patient, but put on it an attractive ointment, and unwrap it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	 And if the ointment is not at hand, then place on the opening of the wound clean cotton so that it absorbs the moisture from the humors; and make the patient lie down on the wound so that the fluid within it can flow out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	 Mays = But/However
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	 And if the wound is by cutting with a knife or a sword and it is simple on the surface of the foot or the back, then cure it with the water that has been prepared for suturing if it is large; or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	 But if it has already affected the bone and you have cut out pieces of it, then turn the wound and try to extract those pieces, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	 But if they are not separate, then leave them inside so that the wound can heal, as their extraction is made easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	 And for other wounds that occur in other parts of the body, the treatment is the same as we have said before.
De las plaguas del ventre.	 Of the wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	 The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either large, small, or medium.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	 Of the large ones, some have seen the intestine or nerves of the intestine because an incision is made into them and their suture must be more vigorous and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	 And a small rupture is done in another way, and know that their reduction is more difficult if you do not seize the opportunity to return them to their place quickly, because it swells and thickens, making its insertion difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	 And therefore the best disruption is the middle one, because in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, unlike the two previously mentioned types.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	 And know that the closure of the abdomen is done in four ways, but there are two common stitches that are also suitable for closing other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	 And two other stitches are common to other wounds, but nevertheless they are more specific for the closure of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	 And I will describe and explain each one to you.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	 So I say that when the wound is small and there is some intestine protruding through it, and it is difficult to reduce, then it happens in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has swollen due to the cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	 And therefore when this happens, you must shave it so that you can immerse a sponge or cloth in warm water alone, or boil it with vinegar, cypress, spice, and cloves, until the swelling is reduced.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	 "And sometimes this is done with an herb that has astringent properties, and it is better than water alone for reducing the swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	 "And when you see the swelling being resolved, then wet the intestine with water in which althea and mallow have been soaked, because through this the patient's discomfort is relieved to a great extent.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	 "But if the patient's discomfort persists despite this treatment, then make a small incision with an instrument used to cut hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	 "And the primary treatment is better when it is appropriate to avoid incision, and thus prevent weakness and debility from occurring.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	 "Regarding the instrument, see its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	 "One part of it is a sharp curve, and the other part is not sharp; its tip is fine, but it should not be as fine as a needle, rather it should be slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	 "And thus when the wound has been enlarged and the intestine is visible, it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible, as this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	 "But when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should raise the head and feet higher than the sides.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	 And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then always place your attention and consideration on this, so that the part where the wound is located is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	 And thus it is necessary for you to administer this in both large and small wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	 And in the small wounds, place that which is prepared, and then make sure that the person administering it is between your hands, holding the entire disruption with their hand and adjusting its lips, and then discover from there to whom it might be necessary for some other reason.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	 And this is the common manner of suturing: you should take one needle or count the number of needles according to the width of the wound; and then pass it from the end of the disruption of the little finger, and strengthen the needle with one, other than putting a thread in both ends of the cord, with both ends of the cloth that is under the cord of the parts inside, until you make that penetrate through that part; and when you have added two ends of the cord and two ends of the cloth, and made four knots.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	 And the needles should be intermediate between coarseness and fineness, because fine needles penetrate the flesh too easily; and coarse ones are difficult to insert into the vein; therefore, they should be intermediate in fineness and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	 And it is not necessary that the needle be placed at the two ends of the vein very close, so that the flesh is not lightly cut and the wound opens before its healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	 And they should not be prolonged in suture, lest the wound be prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	 And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient during their sleep; and you shall place on the suture powdered pills expanded from all sides, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave those in until you know that the wound has healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	 And these types of suture with needles are most suitable for small wounds, because in the suture of their one needle or two or around that number are used.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	 But the second type of suture is common: and it is that you administer with a suture the four ends, of the vein and two ends of the cup, at once, with a needle in which there is thread wrapped in equal measure of fineness and coarseness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	 And then, when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from the same point at which it began, so that the thread can be pulled and gather the pus from the upper part of the wound, ensuring that the suture is as tight as the stitching of cloth.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	 And between each suture, place an amount equal to the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	 This is called "stitching" by men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	 And with this stitching, I sewed the wound that was inflicted on a man in his belly by a sword, and the opening of the wound was greater than a palm's width, and it had protruded around two palms of the intestine from its middle part, and the opening was in the middle of the member; then I returned that which the intestine had been out of the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	 And the wound was healed within fifteen days or thereabouts, and I cared for him and he recovered; and then he lived for many years after, and continued with his usual activities.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	 And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and it was a miracle, for I did not treat him with ointment, because it was in a place where no ointment or any medicine could be applied, but I placed a cotton cloth on the wound twice a day and washed it continually with honey water until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	 Based on the context and similarity to Latin-based languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	 And it is that you begin with stitching the wound, and insert the needle from the outside inward.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	 And then, as the needle penetrates the wound and you insert sutures along its entire length, leave the end of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the inside out in the other extremity of the incision.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	 And when you have done this penetration, then do it again in the same extremity of the incision from outside to inside; and leave the end of the thread that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from inside out.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	 And make the needle penetrate with that thread, making sure it passes through the entire length of the suture so that all of it is inside.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	 And then begin from this same side and sew with that end of the thread on the other side, and remove the needle from the wound, and then return it to the wound and sew the end of the thread on the other side with this end of the suture; and remove that from the wound which is on the far side. >".
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	 And do this one time and another, and do it once more close to another time until you cook everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	 And the summary of this method of suturing is that you sew with a suture of skin, with which you sew the hairs, so that you sew it one time from the end of the tail, and let the other time go until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	 However, the second type of suture, which is also called Gualia and is recommended by him, is that you sew it according to the half-lute technique with which some doctors sew it, so that they unite all divided parts to their corresponding part by nature; and they apply the end of one to the other end of it, and this is done as I recommend to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	 Make sure you place the needle in the end of the thread to your right of the divided part, and make it penetrate into the divided part in that same way, and let the two ends of the thread go; and then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from outside to inside in the two ends of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	 And then you should rotate those parts, and make each of them penetrate from the inside out to the two ends of the miraculous thread, except for those that are in the opposite leg.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	 And this manner of suturing is better than common superficial suturing, and it is the suturing method that was previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	 This is the speech of Gaul
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	 And they may call it differently, some might say that the abdominal suture is performed with two needles, in such a way that you insert into each of them a thread, and begin with the introduction of the needle from which side you wish to start, and make that needle penetrate into the other side according to the suturing method used by those who stitch hearts equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	 And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then its suture is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	 But the judgment on wound treatment is the same as for other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	 Because when you find the recent wound with its blood before the air alters it, and return the intestines and stitch it up properly, then place on it powder that promotes healing.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 And if the air has already affected the wound, then place on it thick ointments that you have at hand until they form a hard scab and cover the threads, and are consolidated and checked; then treat it as you would with other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	 But if the necessary medicines are not present, then immediately place something on it as soon as the discharge begins, changing it twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you should not need any other treatment for simple wounds.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	 But if you fear that the wound may spread to the main limbs, then you should soak wool in good-quality oil or in fresh oil and place it around the edges of the wound between the ankles and under the armpits.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	 And if you feel pain or putrefaction in his intestines, for many times this happens, then cauterize it with black henbane and especially if the putrefaction has penetrated into the intestine and formed a deep ulcer inside it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	 And know that the one from the large intestine is of easier healing than that in the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	 Based on the provided translation style and the context of medieval medical treatises, here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	 But if the discharge from the wound is cloth and you find it fresh, reduce it according to your skill with which you also reduce the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	 But if it has passed to the space and is already turned green or black, then you should strengthen that area with a bandage over the affected part, so that blood flow will come out, because in the cloth there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	 Then you should also cut that which is another ligament, and place two ends of the bandage hanging down from the affected area on either side of the wound, so that the attraction of the affected part will be relieved upon you and the casement of the cloth and the exit of the arm of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	 Remembering wounds when they occur in the intestines.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	 When there is a rupture in the intestines and it is small, then it is possible to restore it in some men, for I have seen this in one who was wounded in his belly with a lance strike, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound had become an old fistula, and thus he had no defecation or flatulence.  (Note: The translation assumes that "disrupcio" refers to a rupture or perforation, and "resteurada" means restored or repaired.)
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	 The text appears to be discussing a medical procedure or treatment for a patient. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	 And since I see that the affected area is already healed, I advise you to place your hand on the patient and discern if there will be an adverse event in their stomach; and do not perceive anyone by this means, but rather eat and drink according to your usual habits, and then enter the bath and perform your mentioned exercises.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	 And some experienced ones say that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be tied off in this manner: and that you take ants with large heads; then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those ants whose mouth is open over the two lips of the wound. Then, as it bites onto them, strengthen its mouth, cutting off its head, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	 Then place another ant near the first one, and continue doing this with ants, one after another, according to the size of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	 Then sew up the wound and bind it; and let those attached heads remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	 And it is possible to tie the intestine with fine thread made from the intestines of animals attached to it, since it is more in needle form; and that you take the end of this thread of intestine, which should be very thin, and then tie the end of it with thread of silk, wrapped around, and then insert that thread into needles and sew up that intestine with it, reducing it in the disruption.  Or, as some say: E ja diysero alcus que es melhor per la sanitat del malaute liar aquel budel am fiel de seda, per tal que·l fiel de seda sia mes fin e menos dissoluble que aquel de budel. And some say that it is better for the health of the patient to tie up that intestine with silk thread, so that the silk thread is thinner and less soluble than that of intestines.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	 "And this method of suturing with ants is nothing but a way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	 "But if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, because then it is not a simple injury but rather a puncture, and it will not heal completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	 "About the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	 "Know that any wound or abscess, when it becomes foul and old and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal but persists over time and is not incised, then in whatever member it may be, it is generally called a fistula, and we call it ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	 "And in truth, a fistula is a hard, white, calloused growth with no pain and an indentation like the indentation of a bird's beak; and for this reason that ulcer is named 'rizatz,' which means 'beak.'
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	 "And in some people the ulcer is wet, which persists over time; and very quickly the moisture is incised within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	 "And sometimes this moisture is abundant, and it is thin, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	 And I have already said in the division that when I mentioned the diseases, any ulcer that is not healed or does not reveal flesh is so only for one of these nine reasons: one of which is either because there is a lack of blood in the body; or because it is malicious; or because between it and the lips there is hard flesh preventing the natural birth of flesh; or because it is of excessive lightness; or because that ulcer itself is rotten and the matter sent to it is of poor quality; or because the medicine is unsuitable for its cure; or when corruption occurs in the region, and it is pestilent; or by the nature of the region, as happens in Zaragoza, where the digestion of diseases is difficult and the natural healing of an abscess is delayed; or because there is a bone in it, or multiple bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	 I have already shown all those causes, and the signs of them, as well as their treatment with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	 And it is necessary for me to let you know the treatment of a fistula that is made by hand through an operation.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	 And you should know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; among them are those which reach large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the liver, or intestines, or the bladder, or some ribs, or some vertebrae of the spine, or some compound joints such as those of the hand and foot; among these are those which affect members similar to the principal ones.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	 And thus that among these fistulas, which follow this manner is one of the most difficult to cure illnesses, and it does not accept treatment, and there is labor and ignorance with it.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	 If any of the fistulas have a depth that does not reach these places as mentioned, and you expect and prepare for its treatment, and you wish to achieve knowledge of it, then take some iron or lead, and if the fistula follows a straight path, you will explore it with this.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	 But if the fistula is twisted, then explore it with a thin lead probe, because lead, due to its lightness of body, is easily bent and followed along the twists.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	 And if the fistula has many openings, it will not be possible for you to mark it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	 Therefore, enema each opening with its own enema, because the moisture with which you enema it will go to the other openings and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	 And then inquire very carefully according to what manner is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the cavity of the fistula is far away or nearby, or if it is a fistula with many openings and is located on this, completely under your strength, with your skill, with which you examine the patient, and the discovery of the pain should be your pressure with your hand over the area, similar to the signs and causes related to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	 And when you have stood over all those causes with true stability, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, distant from the joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places I mention to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Then dry the fistula according to what was said before in its narrative, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupt flesh, and whatever has been born in the orifice of the flesh, or similar, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	 But if the fistula is of great depth, and according to the rule, then it is necessary to insert that into the flesh as much as possible, and then cleanse it of all its corrupt flesh; and then administer poultices wrapped in acute medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have comprehended with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	 And do this several times until the acute medicine has corroded everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	 And then restore it with ointments that promote healthy tissue until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	 But if it does not heal with this, then you must cauterize the area as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	 But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of it, then you should investigate that area and dry it out according to our recommendations, unless you find any cause related to a vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	 But if the bone is exposed and there is any corruption or blackness on it, then you should scrape it until all the corruption is removed; and then treat it with water that promotes the growth of flesh until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	 And if it does not heal and throws out pus as before, then you should know that you have not completely removed the corruption; therefore, you must uncover it further and make a thorough scraping and cleansing of it with the strongest tool at your disposal, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	 And so if it heals, then that is good; but if not, then you should know that this corruption is deep within the body and has not been reached, and therefore in this case it is not beneficial to treat it further but rather to leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	 And if the bone is small or you are able to pull it out, then use fine forceps for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	 And if there are many bones, then carefully extract all of them and leave none behind with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	 However, if any humidity causes resistance or obstruction during the extraction and there is no fear of error, then carefully cut away the ligaments or flesh that are attached to them and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	 But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at that time, then place something over the wound to moisten it, and leave it until that area is filled with flesh and ligaments around those bones. Keep watch over the wound so that it does not heal too quickly and constrain the cut that you made during your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	 Finally, if you fear that the flesh will adhere to the bone, place a cloth soaked in oil or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment or any of the other green ointments on it. When those ligaments have dried up and the bones are separated from them, the swelling will subside and the pain will be relieved.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	 Based on the pattern you've provided and the sentence given, here's the translation:
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	 "And I recommend that you have with you what is needed to assist a man in his illness, so that you may serve as an example and aid in your work.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	 "A young man, around thirty years old, experienced pain in his side, and from the parts within, a swelling developed on the inside of the body until the swelling reached the side, which is a large abscess, with no external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	 "And then the condition persisted due to the doctors' mistakes until the abscess burst, and dark matter flowed out of him. His treatment was paused until his leg became ulcerated, and there were terrible wounds on him that constantly oozed pus and bodily fluids.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	 "And then a multitude of doctors treated him for about two years, but none of them knew more about the art than I did, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	 "And I saw his leg and the matter that flowed from those wounds in large amounts; and the man's body was completely rotten, and his color was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	 "And then I inserted a probe into one of those wounds, and the probe reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	 And I immediately examined all the openings and found them to be connected from every part of the thigh.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	 And then I cut and incised into one of the openings, discovering a piece of bone, which I found to be rotten, already turned to dust and decayed; and I discovered that part of the thigh had become corrupt where it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	 And then I separated and removed what was revealed and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	 And I judged that it was not in the bone but rather the corruption which I cut out and removed, and I had already scraped it away.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	 And then I applied healing ointments to the wound for a long time, but it did not heal.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	 And then I incised and discovered again on the bone according to the first discovery, and found continuous corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	 And I removed what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I made an effort to perform the cure and restoration on him, but he was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	 And then I discovered on him again and did not cease to incise the bone little by little, particularly, and made every effort for his restoration, but he was not restored until I incised around a palm's width of him, and that I extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it became slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	 And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on him or to make an incision in him, except for the arrangement of his weakness and the scarcity of his endurance and fear of death, because he faints at all times due to excessive evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	 And so he is healed by complete healing, and there is nothing in the place of hard flesh; and his condition in his body has been properly arranged and his strength has returned to him; he has been converted into his natural state and neither walking nor any other cause has harmed him.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	 But if the bone is protruding from the previously treated area of the body, then you must cut it in this manner: and that is to take a strong ligament and bind it tightly around the tip of the protruding bone; and command someone to stretch it out; and place a thicker woolen ligature over the first ligature; and then tie it down over the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the extremity for pulling the skin apart, and you expose the flesh in the area where you want to saw, so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	 And place a stick or board underneath the bone securely, because when you do this it is not permitted for the saw to cut the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	 And it is necessary that the incision be made gradually on the affected area, because if it is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear as it should to the touch, then force the incision again.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	 And if the bone is not prominent, before you join one part with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or at the edge of it, then peel back the skin from all sides completely; and then place a stick underneath, and then incise that of the first part where the corruption enters until the incision joins with the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	 And let the incision be small according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	 And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint and cut the bone where it continues with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	 And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable but foolish.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	 And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is very difficult; however, you should explore how the corruption appears to you, and scrape that away, and clean it according to each possible arrangement, and with each method straighten as best you can, when there are no veins or nerves obstructing you.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	 E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of your source sentence:
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	 And I will list for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you should have as simple tools with which you will proceed to carry out your task, which you will practice on others.
Forma de serra:	 Form of saw
Forma de autra serra:	 Form of another saw
Forma de autra serra:	 Form of another saw  (This phrase suggests that there might be different types or shapes of saws being referred to.)
Forma de autra serra gran:	 Form of another large saw
Forma de ray:	 Form of saw
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	 The head of this saw should be in the shape of a star-headed nail, and its teeth should be in the form of steel needles.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	 And it is not suitable except that with this [saw], the heads of the joints should be shaved when they are rotten, or the mouth [of the wound] is very wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	 Larger form of razor than others
Forma de razori menor:	 Smaller form of razor
Forma de razori lat:	 Broad form of razor
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	 Another well-made saw: it should be made of hardwood with a more superior arch and the iron teeth sharp, and its handle should be decently made of wood.
Forma de lu:	 Shape of it  (The "it" refers to the saw mentioned in the previous sentence.)
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 The shape of a razor which has a concavity
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 The shape of another fine/delicate razor
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 This translates to: "Form of another curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 "Form of small razor resembling a tendon:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 This translates to: "Form of an incisor with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 "Form of another, smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 "Form of another incisor; this one resembles a ray, and its end is like a saw, and it is used in many places on the bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 "Form of a saw that is suitable for cutting through the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 And its end is triangular with a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	 "And it is made of Indian iron, and likewise all the instruments that we have mentioned for razors and incisors and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	 For cutting extremities and sawing bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	 "The extremities can be amputated for intrinsic reasons or extrinsic ones, either because you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the treatment did not work, or sometimes the corruption goes to the member which does not perceive any cause, then it is necessary that you cut off that member until where the corruption reaches, so that the patient escapes from death or great evil, which is a greater affliction of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	 And the sign of that person to whom it occurs is that the member turns black until it seems as if fire has already burned it, or you can approach the blackness until the blackening reaches that member which affects him and spreads throughout his entire body; thus beware of the outcome for him.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	 Similarly, if the cause is the corruption by some poisonous creatures such as a sea scorpion or a viper or a weevil, and so on.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	 And if the corruption or infection is at the tip of the finger, then you should cut off the finger and not give the corruption space to enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	 Similarly, if it affects the hand, then you should cut off that part from the wrist downward, and do not give the corruption space to enter into the forearm of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	 And if it spreads to that [the forearm], then you should cut off the arm at the elbow joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	 And if the corruption spreads further and goes around the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and administering any other treatment for this condition is futile.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	 And similarly, when corruption invades the foot, you should cut it into one of the knots (i.e., a joint).
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	 And if there is pressure on the sole of the foot, then you should cut off the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	 But if it rises to the ankle, then you should cut the leg into the joint of the ankle.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	 And if the corruption has already reached the ankle, then there is no hope for him, but rather he must be left to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	 And the way to cut off or amputate the limb is that you should bind a ligature above the part where you want to cut, and place another ligature on the spot; and the assistant extends a ligature below the parts, and the other assistant extends another ligature above; and you separate the flesh which is between the two ligatures until there is an opening wide enough that all the flesh is exposed; and then it should be cut or sawed off.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	 And it is necessary that cloth of linen be placed on all parts, so that the healthy place does not touch, and let the patient have a clean bandage and a cauterized wound.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	 But if you cause a flow of blood while operating, then you should cauterize the place lightly, or place some powder on it that restricts the blood; and then return to your medicine until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And immediately bind the affected limb with an appropriate bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	 And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his foot, this very accident that I and you have discussed, which is because darkness occurred in his foot with burning that resembled the combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	 And that corruption first happened in his foot until it affected the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	 And then that man prepared for himself the pus that came from the treatment of his foot with great vehemence due to the pain and burning he experienced, and he applied it to that foot up to the joint, and he healed it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	 Long time ago the same corruption happened to him in the finger of his right hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	 And then he came to me, and I was obliged to expel that excess with the water that is placed on the hand of medicines, close to the cleansing of his body; and the excess did not go away and began to spread to another finger in the same hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	 And he asked me to apply the hand of him, and I did not want to do that hoping for the expulsion of that excess, and moreover I feared lest the application of his hand would kill him, because the power of the patient was weak.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	 And since he recovered from me, he returned to his land and it was reported to me that the man cut off his entire hand and was cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	 And I have included this narrative only to serve as an aid for what comes of this illness, and to be a sign by which it may be recognized and accordingly treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	 On the treatment of veins and the type of enema with medicine.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	 When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged to such an extent that it collects pus, and then it breaks open and perforates, and the pus comes out, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it is thin like fine cloth, and corruption has not yet reached there, and it does not press on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a vein, and not a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	 However, if the space is prolonged to such an extent that corruption reaches a certain member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	 And the treatment for it is that you cut off all of that skin, just as it has become twisted and, especially when it is thin and resembles cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	 And it is that you should consider the abdomen, and if it is swollen, and the arm that you have is of foul odor, then enema that one with Egyptian medicine, which is made of oil, vinegar, and honey divided into parts, and they are put together in a vessel, and they are cooked over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	 Sure, I'll give it a try! Here is the translation:
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	 And then you should extract it with disregard; and do this for as many days until the wound is cleansed and the stench has been removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	 And in some cases, you enema with ashes water when this medicine is not available to you; and it is that you take the ashes of vinegar, put them in water; then collect it and enema the patient with it until you see that the wound has healed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	 And if the patient cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or ashes water, then enema them with water and honey mixed together, and then enema them with wine and honey mixed together, because it is the nature of honey to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the wound adhere, especially when the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	 And when you do this several times and notice that the wound has healed, then enema them with water that promotes the growth of flesh in them.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	 And it is that you take of the unguent "diaphonicon" and dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine; or that you enema them with some medicines and other unguents that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on unguents.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	 And if the opening of the sinus is too narrow to receive the cannula of the clyster, then you should gradually enlarge it with an iron [tool], and place in it a clove wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicum ointment until it is sufficiently enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	 And similarly, if the opening is too wide, then you should bring together its lips with a stitch and leave in it the amount in which the clyster can enter without addition.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	 And if the opening of the arm through which the vein is raised to the upper parts is dry, then moisten it with the lowest amount of pus that is in it so that the vein can enter below, for when the vein is constricted by the narrowness of the sinus, flesh will be generated in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	 And if it is not possible to moisten the sinus within the environment of the lowest amount of pus as you wish, then you should prepare the member with a preparation through which the vein can flow easily according to what seems suitable to you and that no cause of the vein is retained in it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	 And take consolidating medicines, which should be placed on the sinus appropriately for this purpose; extend those [medicines] on a linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	 Let's break down the text into manageable parts and translate it line by line:
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	 "But that which is on top of the opening of the vein, you must always pay attention to it so that something does not fall into it from the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	 "And in order for you to know whether what flows from the arm is much or little, or if it is digested or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	 "And also consider the location of that vein: whether the patient feels pain in it or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	 "And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that has been poured over the opening of the vein already adheres, or approaches adhesion, then on the second day you must free it or unstick it, and when you free the wound, then change the cloth for another and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	 "But if from the vein a rather long time has passed and no subtle fluid comes out, do not despair of its adhesion, for healing is approaching, because there are some people in whom the generation of flesh in their wounds is slow, and there are others who experience the opposite.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	 "And if from the vein many days have passed and the arm is undigested, then know that the vein does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the vein is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you should apply drying medicines. And if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their power, they become dry like a plaster made from diaphanous wine, to which an excessive amount of egg has been added.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	 And the most important treatment is to take diachylon ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, then apply it generously on the affected area, and afterwards bind it with a clean cloth, using that ointment.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	 And if there is no diachylon ointment, then take myrrh, aloe and sesame seeds, grind them all together into a powder and sprinkle it over the honey while it's on the fire. Then strain that through cloth and strengthen it over the wound; and line it with the honey you have cooked until it thickens, and sprinkle it over cloth and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	 And sometimes they are administered with longwort and lily roots (and it is lilies) and erysimum flour and centaury, and use these simples or compounds, grind them and sift them into a powder over the honey you have mixed; and use that.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	 And if the wound is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the flesh, and make an investigation into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you treat it with fistula cure, as said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	 Based on the given text and context, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	 And therefore, when you have that patient as we described in the division and do not perform your treatment, then it is necessary for you to remove with an iron all the remaining superfluity from the nail, and afterwards cauterize the wound appropriately, because cautery is very beneficial in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 But if the bone is sound and the nail has already been removed, and the edges of the nail are pressing into the flesh at the base, and they begin to puncture and lacerate that area, then it is necessary for you to place a thin ribbon under the edge of the nail that is piercing the flesh, and push upwards, easily slice off that piece of flesh, and place corrosive medicines on what remains of the flesh until everything has been removed; and afterwards cure that patient with ointments until they are healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	 But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then it is necessary for you to cut out that part of the bone and extract it, because no time will pass in which a corrupted bone can be healed.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you see the corruption and decay spreading into the fingers, then you should cut off that finger at one of the joints, according to the best medical practice, and afterwards cure it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	 "However, when something like this, which is born in the hands of some men, is very light in flesh, and very light in bones, or very light in fingernails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	 "And some of them are born at the base of the joint, or it is their birthplace in certain knots of those.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	 "However, that which is born in certain knots of the finger does not cause harm, but this one that is born in the joints is very harmful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	 "And of those that are fleshy by nature, the incision should be light, and you should cut it at its root with a lancet.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	 "However, of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, beware of its incision.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "However, in that which is born in the knots of the finger, you should cut the flesh at its beginning with a round incision to the bone, and then use one of those suitable saws for this purpose, and then cure it until it heals.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	 "However, the consolidation that occurs between their visible joints, either by nature of man born thus, or by consolidation from a wound, or by burning with fire, or by resemblance; then you should cut away that consolidation until the joints return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	 And then place between their sheets the infusion of rosemary oil so that they are not easily solidified, and separate among them or place a thin lead sheet between them until it is consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	 And similarly, if there is a solidification in one of these places with the palm, then you dry that solidification according to how it is prepared and suitable for the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	 About the origin of veins, they are called varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	 Veins are varicose veins, and they are large, twisted vessels filled with melancholic excesses that appear in the limbs of the body, most commonly in the legs, especially among travelers, workers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	 Therefore, you should administer purgation of the body with black hellebore several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	 However, their cure with iron is done in two ways: one way is that it be incised and the black blood be drawn out; the other way is that the vein be raised and all of it be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	 The incision is done in this way: first, wrap the leg of the patient with hot water until the thick blood, which is foul from the leg, is resolved. Then strengthen the leg of the patient to the upper part of the thigh down to the lower part of the knee with a bandage, and then make an incision in one place, or two, or three with a wide cut. And then draw out the black blood from the lower part of the leg upwards with your left hand, up and down, until you have extracted as much blood as you wish and as many times as is necessary to restore the patient's health.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	 And immediately bind it, and command the patient to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	 And repeat the treatment with bloodletting when the veins are full and inform the patient of this.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	 But the elevation of their [legs] is done in this manner: You who raise the patient's leg, if there are hairs on it, first shave it; then put it in a bath and soak the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell. Or if it is to be exercised with strong exercise, if a bath is not present, until the limb becomes numb.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	 And then dry the cord in the right side of the vein for drying on the thigh or at the back of it you should place the needle, or lower down you should place the heel.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	 And then open the cord with a hook and cut the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and its appearance should be like that which sees this asks for darkness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	 And therefore as you draw [the blood] and from the cord you see that white strand, it shall be a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	 And then you place that vein below until it is raised and removed from the cord, and suspend it with a hook to an empty receptacle.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	 And then make another incision near that incision for three fingers' width, and then remove the cord from above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	 And then lift that and make another incision behind the ankle, and then extract it and lift it until it exits through the second incision, and then extract it from the incision above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	 And do this until you have extracted it from the highest or most superior incision of all, until it is entirely out; and then make an incision there.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	 And if it does not obey you in being extracted and lifted, then insert a strong double-edged needle and tie it off, and extract it, or insert a reed beneath it and turn your hand in all directions until it is dislodged.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	 And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift that much and it has come upon the patient because of that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And when all of it has been dislodged, then place over the wound site wool soaked in wine and olive oil, both refined and unrefined, and tend to it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	 And if the intestine is twisted with twisting that is wrapped around its parts, and it does not follow the straight path as we have said, then you must make an incision along all of its twisted parts and in the places where it is wrapped, and then suspend it with hooks until you remove it entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	 And be careful with your incision that you do not cut the vein and that you do not injure it, for it will be difficult for you to lift it; and preserve your skill in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	 Shape of the instrument with which the intestine is cut:
Forma de unci orp:	 Shape of the hook:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	 It is not as sharp as the hooks nor does it have a pointed tip so that it does not injure the vein; and it has great flexibility, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; there is some unnecessary thickness in it as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	 Of the extraction of the calf vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	 This vein is generated in the thighs in hot lands, such as Al-Andalus in Arabic land and in the hot and dry lands of India with little humidity, where there is neither grass nor trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	 And sometimes it is generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	 And its generation is from putrefaction, which comes after the bowel movement, just like poisonous snakes and worms and scorpions and worms that generate between the bowels and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	 And the sign of its onset is this: in the thigh, there is a vein that becomes severely inflamed; and then the place swells up; and then the vein begins to come out of that swelling, like a plant root.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	 And when its tip appears, then you should wrap around it a lead weight that weighs between one and two pounds. Tie it on and let the lead hang from the thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	 And every time something comes out of it for any reason to the outside parts, wrap that in lead and tie it off.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	 And if it is prolonged, then you should cut off a piece of it and wrap the rest; and do not cut that one straight until it has come out, because if you cut it straight it will contract and enter into the flesh and cause an abscess and rotting in the place and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	 "Therefore, it is necessary to treat it gently and remove it little by little until it is completely removed from the body, leaving nothing behind in the patient.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	 "And this vein can protrude in some men to the length of five palms and ten fingers, and it has come to my knowledge that one reached twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	 "And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the reed into the wound and make a long incision into the body until everything in the matter has been evacuated. Then apply putrefactive ointments to the area for several days with medicines; afterward, treat it as you would an abscess.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	 "And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, and it comes out through many openings, with each opening having its own branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	 "Therefore, treat it as we have said in the previous section and with the aforementioned remedies.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	 "Concerning the removal of worms that are generated under the skin, which is also known as 'bovine illness'.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	 "This illness is called in some places 'bovine illness' because it often happens to oxen, and a worm is formed, one of which is born between the skin and flesh, traveling through the whole body up and down, and its movement from limb to limb can be felt until it breaks the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	 And his generation is by the putrefaction of certain humors, just as happens with worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	 And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the eye, then it causes great weakness in him and enters and destroys the eye, and this requires much observation.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	 Therefore, when you want to cure this and extract it, it is not done unless you know its movement and appearance to the touch, and then you must hold firmly what is above it and what is below it with tightness and constriction, and then dry it out and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if it is embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it, then place a cautery with fire over the area where it dwells, and the greatest fear is its corruption with which it corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	 But if you see that it has reached the head near the eye, then hold the eyelid with strong constriction, and then dry it out, and extract it; and it is necessary that the patient use purifying medicines to evacuate bad putrid humors from his body, and beware of foods that cause putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	 Here is a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	 Based on the pattern and context from your provided translations, here's my best guess for the translation:
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	 And I have already seen that one which I am about to describe to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	 I was called to tend to a sick woman in a village, and upon examining her arm, I discovered a small inflammation in the vein of the arm. After an hour had passed, I saw that inflation moving as if it were a worm, ascending upwards, but more lightly than would be possible for a worm, as if it were live silver moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	 And then the pain moved to that location and settled in the muscle, and it remained there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	 And then it ran through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	 And then she told me that it was turning throughout her entire body, as I saw; and I was amazed at the transformation of it and its speed from one limb to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	 And I had seen this before in my own hands in that same manner, but I have never seen words which cause pain to be transformed from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	 However, I did not see this with the hands as I did with the woman.  />
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	 And I did not think that this was the case, but rather that it was because the woman was from the countryside, where bodies are dry and veins are visible, and in such cases this wind appears to be transformed by sensation.  />
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	 And it is necessary that this treatment not be used on those who are delicate and have prominent veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	 And when you wish to treat him and the patient feels that pain, then do not approach him as we have said before. Instead, press firmly on that area and leave him slightly lifted until that trapped wind is expelled, and then cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	 But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat him by purging the body and using something that expels wind, and administer to him pills of bitter medicine and pills of syrup and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	 About the removal of arrows
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	 Arrows vary according to their types and the parts of the body they strike, for their diversity is such that some have large tips, small ones, concave ones, blunt ones, and solid ones; others have three prongs, and there are those with barbs, and those with shafts.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	 And as for the treatment according to the limbs and places where the arrow strikes, there are two methods: for the limbs or main organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar; if you see signs of death after an arrow strikes any of these members, which I will explain shortly, then it is necessary that you avoid removing the arrow from those in whom death occurs due to its severity. If you do not see these signs of imminent death, and the arrow is not embedded deep within the limb, then remove the arrow and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given text:
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	 And therefore, if these signs appear to you, then you should abstain from the treatment and the removal of the arrow, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	 But the signs of an arrow wound to the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and one feels as if it has struck a hard object, not a soft one; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse's movement, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and sweating, and fainting. Therefore, know that death approaches without delay.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	 And the signs when an arrow has struck the lung are: foamy blood exudes from the wound, and the veins near the neck swell up, and the patient's color changes, and a great deal of spirit is exhaled, and he seeks to draw in cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	 And if the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the feet, and the pain is then near the small ribs, and a great deal of bile is produced with violent pain and sighing, and all the limbs' muscles are not moving well.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	 And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then food of some kind will soon come out of the wound, undigested.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	 And if the arrow is lodged in the abdomen and stuck in him, if there is some opening of the wound, or of the cloth, or intestine which has been torn apart, and there is no hope for his recovery from the removal of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	 And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine is flowing out, and some swelling occurs outside, and there is severe pain on the patient, then know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	 But the other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders and their attachments, vertebrae of the back, collarbone, pelvis, thighs and similar parts of the limbs are saved according to the greater dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein or artery and is not a poisoned arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	 And I will tell you about this concerning the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand it regarding the treatment you should apply.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	 The reason is that I once treated a man who had an arrow stuck in the tear duct of his eye, near the root of his nose. I extracted it from the other side, leaving the shaft of the arrow behind his ear, and he was cured, with no injury to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	 And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had struck him in the gray of his eye, beneath the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden and only a small tip could be obtained from it, to which the shaft adhered, and it was a great arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's head in which there were no feathers.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	 And the Jew died, and it was not an unfortunate accident for him.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	 And another arrow was extracted from a Christian man, which had fallen into his throat. It was an Arabic arrow and it still had its feathers; and then I cut between two of its guides, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I skillfully removed it, and after that I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	 And another arrow was extracted from a man which had struck him in the belly, and I thought that he would die from it; but then, after thirty days passed and none of his dispositions changed, I cut into the arrow and hooked onto it, and he was healed, and no unfortunate accident befell him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	 And I saw another man in whom an arrow had struck his back, and the wound had healed over him, and after seven years had passed, the arrow came out of its own accord.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	 And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had pierced her belly, and the wound was closed inside her, and it did not change its position, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	 And I saw another man in whom an arrow had pierced his face, and the wound was closed and the arrow broken off, not finding much pain here, and similar to these (cases).
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	 And (I) extracted the arrow from the king's chief man whose middle of the nose it had pierced and had already inclined slightly to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	 And I was called to his care immediately after the arrow entered three days (later).
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	 And then I found the wound of the arrow very narrow; and then I explored it with a fine probe, and did not feel it; but he felt a prick below the right ear, and then I suspected that this prick was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	 And I plastered the area with a plaster that had both attractive and digestive properties, believing that the area would swell so that the location of the arrow would appear to me, in order to dry over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	 And then I placed a sharp, corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opened up, and with a probe I explored that area, and found the tip of the subtle arrow, which was attached to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	 And then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow became visible to me, and I passed time with it over the course of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	 And since the wound was enlarged and I could insert the forceps into it, I kept them there without removing them. Not content with this, I did not cease to be subtle and ingenious about that matter in many ways until one day I succeeded in taking out the arrow using finely made forceps, as will be described later in this chapter. Then I treated the wound again.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	 And although some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, I restored it and the wound healed completely, and the patient was cured entirely and did not suffer from any further ailment.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	 And I relate to you the qualities of extracting some arrows so that you may rule and understand that which I have not said, for the divisions of this art and its definitions are not comprehended by narrative alone, nor do these books comprehend them.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	 And wise practitioners compare the little with much; and what is present with what is absent; and they discover a new operation and a new instrument for dealing with the causes that are external to the craft when this occurs.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	 And so I say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they are stuck except in two ways: either by attraction of the place into which they enter, or by the contrary action of the other parts.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	 And that which is thrown by the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place, and is pulled out and expelled.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	 And if it does not obey an attempt to remove it in the hour when it was stuck, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it softens, and its attraction and exit are eased.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	 Similarly, if it is stuck in the bones and does not obey your attempts to remove it, then leave it for a few days and try to pull it out with attraction and moisture each day, and eventually it will be expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	 And if it does not obey your attempts to remove it after a few days, then you should pierce around the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine awl until the place is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	 And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the cavities of the brain, and some of those accidents that I have mentioned appear in the patient, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it there until its nature is balanced, approximately after a few days; because if the arrow reaches the skull, then death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	 And if the arrow is embedded only in the body of the bone and does not penetrate into the skull, and the patient remains for a few days without any of those accidents occurring to him, then you should attempt to extract the arrow and the patient.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 But if the arrow does not obey you for extraction, then you should administer herbs around the circumference of the arrow as we have recommended, and then care for the place until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	 But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and is hidden from sight, then you should search for it with your hand, and if you feel it, then draw it out with some instruments that are suitable for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	 And if you cannot reach it due to the narrowness of the wound and the length of the arrow, and here there are no bones, nerves or veins, then make an incision over the wound until it is widened and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	 And if he has ears with which you can hold him, then cut the flesh in which it is stuck from all sides with all the skill you can muster; and contrive upon this, that if you cannot remove the skin on the fracture of the ears and twisting them until they obey.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	 And when you perform the removal of the arrow from any place it is stuck, then use tweezers with your hand and forceps on all sides until it obeys; and be careful with utmost caution that the arrow is not broken and that the removal is done skillfully and precisely from him and the arrow.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	 And if you cannot do this at that moment, then leave it for several days until the parts surrounding it can soften, and then repeat the procedure when it has become less painful.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	 But if blood flow is present, then administer what we have said about treatment in the respective chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	 And be careful not to cut into a vein, nerve, or tendon, and administer skill in every way possible in the removal of the arrow; and do this with gentleness, calmness, slowness, and steadiness as I have recommended to you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	 E therefore you must arrange the arrow in such a way that the patient is according to the figure by which you should direct the shooting of the arrow into them, because it is more helpful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	 But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	 But the arrows that are thrown by the contraries of the other side, or if you have already removed some part from them to the outside parts, or make the tip of the arrow gibbous by feeling the part above the cord, and sometimes it is raised; then you cut on that; and let the section be according to the amount in which the forceps take hold; and then throw it away, because it is made lightly to extinguish.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	 But if it is lodged in the bone, then you twist the blade according to the opposite direction until the arrow presses into the bone, and widen as you insert it, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	 And if not, leave it for some days, and then try again until it comes out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	 And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, then you should remove it with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	 But if the shaft has fallen out and you wish to administer an impulse, then you introduce this, if it is blind, with a hollow instrument through which you can enter the concavity of the arrowhead at the back of the arrow and then remove it with it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	 "But if the arrow is barbed, then you should push it in further with a strong instrument, because the arrow is eased by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	 "And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you cut out all the flesh in which the venom is found, if possible, and afterwards treat it with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 "And if the arrow strikes the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can touch it with your finger, and it is possible to cut over it, then cut over it and beware of cutting a vein or nerve, and remove the arrow, and afterwards sew up the wound if necessary, and treat it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	 "The shape of tongs with which arrows are pulled out:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	 "Their ends should be shaped like a bird's beak, made with serrations so that they can grip the arrow and not let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	 "And from these are made various instruments, large, few and small, according to the size of the arrow and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	 Here's the line-by-line translation of your provided sentence:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	 Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	 Certainly! Let's try translating that into English line by line:
De fleubotomia de las venas.	 "On phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	 "The veins of phlebotomy are such and such, of which there are sixteen in the head. Among these are two pulsating veins that are near the ears, known as jugulars; two herbs that are on both temples; and two veins that are in the corners of both eyes, called lacrimal; a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the tip of the nose; two veins at the throat; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; these are the veins known as algelic; and there are two veins under the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	 "However, the veins that are bled in the arms are five. Of those, one is the cephalic, and it is called 'wild vine' by the people; another is the median cephalic vein, composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic; the people call this one 'the vein of the whole body'; the basilic vein is the one placed in the domestic part of the forearm, and it is called 'small vein,' which the common people call 'belly vein'; the vena funis of the arm, placed on the wrist, is the one that is bled; this is the one that appears prominently on the back of the hand. Also, the salvatella, which is the vein between the auricular finger and the little finger, consists of two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	 And in the foot and leg there are three veins: one of these is behind the curvature of the back of the wild boar's thigh, and the second is the saphenous, and its place is on the inner side of the domestic pig's thigh, and the sciatic vein, and its place is on the outer side of the wild boar's thigh; and in the leg there are other similar veins.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	 The healing of the veins that are near the ears is for ancient cataracts and migraines, and old ulcers on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	 And the way to bleed them is as I tell you: it should be done at the top of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed on the back of the head in the place where both veins are with a wide cloth and good friction; then tightly tie the patient's neck with a bandage so that both [veins] and their places are near the ears in two prominent areas of the head; and you will look for it with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those [veins] with your finger, this is a sign to proceed.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	 Then take the scalpel, and it is that which is sharp, and then you insert it under the vein until the phlebotomist reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	 And then raise your hand with the vein and the bone to the separated parts above, and cut the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	 And let the length of the incision be about two finger widths or around that; and make as much blood come out as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And then strengthen with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	 And already at the beginning of this book, we discussed those (remedies) and their use in cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	 But of the two arterial veins in the temples, the one that is beneficial for bloodletting (phlebotomy) is ancient and effective against migraines, frequent headaches, and acute overflow of fluids in the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	 And the way to perform phlebotomy on these veins is as I have instructed you: constrict the patient's neck with one hand until both veins can be clearly felt and their pulse is evident under your finger; then proceed with caution.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 Then raise the skin over the vein slightly with your index finger, and insert the lancet beneath it, lifting the vein upwards; then cut as you did with the other two veins; and allow the blood to flow according to your needs.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Then release the patient's bandage, place your finger on the vein for an hour, then cover it with a cloth and poultices, strengthening it firmly; leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	 Sure, here is a translation attempt of the given medieval medical text into English:
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	 And therefore, the incision of phlebotomy in the frontal vein is appropriate for phlebotomy in ancient diseases of the face and for migraine, heat, and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And the quality of his phlebotomy is as I will tell you; so it is that the patient should tighten his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a fleam, and this is its shape.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Place the prominent point at the top of the fleam on that vein and strike it with the handle or another similar object, allowing the blood to flow according to the desired amount; then release the puncture from the patient and tighten it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	 And sometimes it is opened with a wide phlebotomy, but it is not necessary that the phlebotomy be sharp at its extremity like other phlebotomies, rather it should be blunt, and phlebotomize in this manner across the width because the bone is close to the surface and thin, so that the subtle phlebotomy would break on it.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	 But the incision of the two veins which are near the tear ducts at the corners of the eyes is for itchiness of the eyes due to heat and pus in the eyes, and for diseases of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	 Based on the context and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's my translation attempt for the given sentence:
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	 It seems like the text is discussing a medical procedure, likely a form of bloodletting or phlebotomy. Here's a line-by-line translation attempt:
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 And then let blood run as much as is necessary for you, place weights on those areas, and strengthen them for one night, and then release them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	 But the bloodletting of the nasal vein is suitable for acute fever and violent cold, and for diseases of the face and migraine, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	 And the way to perform bloodletting on him is for the patient to strengthen their neck and then take their nose with your left hand, and take a thin, long fleabite and place it in the middle of the head of the nose according to the rule, because the vein does not appear here by touch, and because the blood begins to flow immediately. xspace
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	 Ensure that you gradually remove your hand with the fleabite and let the blood run according to your need; then bind it for one night, because this vein heals quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	 But the benefit of bloodletting from both veins is the constriction of air, and the onset of leprosy, and many diseases and rashes and bad ulcers, such as herpetic eruptions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	 And the way to perform bloodletting from those veins is for the patient to strengthen both with a bandage under their chin; and let the practitioners be above the head of the patient, and let the patient sit on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	 Let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	 Here's the translation of the provided sentence:
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	 And in the treatment of phlebotomy of the Algerian veins, you will find small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and its surroundings.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	 And the quality of that phlebotomy is such that you make the patient sit before you, strengthen his neck with a bandage, then turn up his lips and look at two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; each is identified by its blackness, and this is more so because in their surroundings are small black veins; and then you cut each one with a cutting incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	 But if there is doubt and you do not know which one it is, then cut the larger of the two veins, or the most prominent one.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	 And do the same with the two veins that are above the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	 However, it is more common to cut both veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	 But for the two veins that are below the tongue, the treatment is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for precaution against inflammations in the throat, for sore throat, and for mouth diseases.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	 And the quality of bloodletting those is to follow the patient between your hands in front of the sun, and raise their tongue, and look under the tongue; from one side of it comes a vein, and from the other side another vein, and the color of each tends towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	 And then bleed each one; and be careful not to go too far in bleeding those, because beneath them are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And the veins that are bled in the elbow are those which flow customarily in all men, and their bleeding is done in two ways, either by placing a thin lancet or one made of olive wood inclined to subtlety; or with a cutting lancet, and this is called alnessil, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	 And this alnessil is that which is suitable for cutting, and of these are thin and subtle species according to the width of the veins and according to their narrowness.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	 Shape of a lancet made from myrtle:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	 it has the shape as you see, and it is suitable for opening full, apparent, large veins that contain thick, turbid blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	 And this is the method of olive oil enema:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	 And this enema is of lesser volume and more refined, and it is suitable for enema in subtle veins that contain subtle blood from the citrus fruit.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	 But the assistance for the enema in the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: because it extracts blood from illnesses that are below the gullet and the neck, and from what touches the feet and the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	 It is advisable for the person administering this enema to be very careful and cautious, because beneath it there is an artery, and if he errs or makes a mistake in the puncture of the enema, he will cut that artery and cause blood flow, so it is necessary not to perform this with a pointed enema, but rather to cut it first with a lancet.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then it is necessary for you to leave that one and move to another, or seek some of its branches; or perform the enema at the end of the arm, because this is more evident; and proceed with a lancet enema in the same way as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	 And when you see, as you strengthen the ligament, swelling in the place that you marked with a needle, then that swelling is the swelling of an artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	 And if you see blood flowing in the phlebotomy like the urine of a child, and the blood is thin and red, then know that it is from the artery; and then cut and press your finger over it for a long time; and after remove your finger, and if the blood has been cut off, because usually it has been cut off, then strengthen the arm and let it be. ⇒ And if you see blood flowing in the phlebotomy like a child's urine, and the blood is thin and red, then know that it is from an artery; therefore, cut and press your finger over the site for a long time. After removing your finger, if the bleeding has stopped (as it usually does), then strengthen the arm and leave it be.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	 And keep watch over the patient's urine, and be vigilant of him, and do not move him for some days until he is cured.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	 But if the blood does not stop, and you see that your presence is no longer necessary, then cut the artery, if it appears to you; for its extremity is contracted, and the blood is cut off; or take a compress of figs, and apply it, and take half of it and strengthen it over the vein's site with a stricture, descent with ligature and with powders until the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	 And then, if his blood is cut, it is good; otherwise, cure him with the water that was mentioned before, remembering the place where the cutting flow of blood occurred.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	 And the abscission of his blood is difficult in many respects due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of tearing the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	 But the phlebotomy of the dark vein is advantageous because it removes blood from the superior part of the head and the inferior part of the body; for this reason it is composed of a branch of the basilic vein and a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	 And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be careful during his bloodletting because underneath that there is a nerve; and so if he presses too hard during the puncture of the phlebotomy and touches the nerve, he will cause numbness, and it will be difficult for him to heal, and often he will not be completely cured. And this nerve appears in many sensations; and if it is hidden from some men and is subtle and not visible, then it is necessary that you place the phlebotomy with which you bleed with a section of aluminum, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	 And if the vein is between two nerves, then you split the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	 The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and helps cure headaches.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	 And it is specifically important to note that if you want the phlebotomy to be done with an olive-shaped or pear-shaped lancet; because they are the safest for all veins, as they do not affect the artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	 However, you should be careful when performing the phlebotomy to ensure that with the lancet you only pierce the skin, and seek a less sensitive spot, and do not press too hard unless it is first determined by percussion that there are some veins in that area for phlebotomy.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	 However, it is also important to note that swelling can occur in some people if they are not phlebotomized at the first site of percussion, but do not press on that swelling.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	 However, the quality of phlebotomy and its consequences are important, in which you should consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	 The first aspect of this is that you should know that phlebotomy is only administered for the preservation of health and with hope for the patient and caution against the onset of illnesses, and that it should be done in one of the veins that are in the arm, namely: cephalic, dark and basilica; and that it should be done at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in the spring and autumn, and in winter close to a meal, when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	 And let a phlebotomy be performed on the third day or at the earliest in the morning after three hours have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	 But when phlebotomy is administered, it should be done more according to convenience and necessity, whether by night or day, at any hour and in any season.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	 And it is fitting that children not be phlebotomized until they have reached fourteen years of age, and a pregnant woman should not be phlebotomized except between the fourth and seventh months, and old people who have already passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	 And if someone wishes to be phlebotomized by any means, it is fitting that they cleanse their intestines before the phlebotomy with a purging clyster, especially if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw the impurities of the intestines into the phlebotomy of the limbs, which are putrid and harmful to the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	 And patients suffering from nausea or drunkenness should not be phlebotomized until those conditions have been removed from them, nor should they be phlebotomized while recovering from illness or intoxication, nor those with dropsy. Moreover, phlebotomy should be avoided near colic, vomiting, abdominal mass, frequent sexual intercourse, heavy labor, fasting, vigils, and any other cause that weakens the strength of the body or soul.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	 "And then carefully consider the subtlety of the humors before this, if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medicines if it is suitable for the patient.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	 "And then enter a bath if there is no cause to prevent it, or exercise in some way so that the blood becomes thinned.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	 "And perform phlebotomy on the patient at the foot of the bed, around the third hour of the day, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	 "And ensure that the patient's foot is protected on that day from all evil animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily incidents, such as labor, excessive fatigue, sex, and similar activities.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	 "And at the time of the patient's rest, have fragrant substances present in their use, as is customary among men for their pleasant scent and with balms and similar things according to the degree of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	 "And have the phlebotomist sit on a cushion that is higher than the one on which the patient who must be bled is sitting.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	 "And then have the patient extend their arm, and have the phlebotomist rub it with their hand two or three times; and then tightly bind the wound with a strap and wrap it two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	 And before the incision, it is necessary that the person who needs to be phlebotomized rub their hands together until the veins are swollen and apparent to the touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	 And before the phlebotomist anoints his lancet with a little ancient oil properly, and places his index finger of the left hand on that vein, below the place where he wants to perform the phlebotomy, so that the vein flees a little, and the pulsation is stopped; for it is from the veins that you find thus as if fugitive cords, which you should flee during phlebotomy, and of those are the ones full of airiness and when you place the lancet on that one it contracts under the lancet, and it is discovered to the phlebotomist; and the lancet does not open the vein, and if it opens, that one is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	 Therefore, for this reason, the phlebotomist must be proficient and attentive to all these factors.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	 And then remove the lancet, but if the vein has been opened in one pass, that is good; and if not, you repeat this another time at a nearby place, or on it with haste, if the spot is not inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	 And if the area is inflamed or the patient seems distressed, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not bind it tightly, because this will draw out the inflammation strongly, nor should they enter the bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	 Then repeat the bloodletting if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	 And if the incision is small and blood flows gently, and you fear that not enough blood will come out as desired, then repeat the bloodletting in that spot according to correctness and adjust the opening a little, and do this quickly before the area becomes inflamed, because for many men, you should make only a small incision.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	 But if you see that it is already inflamed, then do not repeat [the bloodletting] on it, because no cause excuses you from this; and place some of the oil's incision over it, because it relieves the body of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	 And in this case, olive oil is better than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	 Similarly, apply an oil incision to every bloodletting with which you should prohibit the body from losing too much blood, and use theriac, aloes, and sage when one of these is placed on the area, because blood is thinned and moved when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	 "And if at the site of the phlebotomy a large abscess has formed, as it often happens, especially for those who have not been bled before or during the slight opening of the vein, then you should cut and place on the affected area a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly scraped, and hold it there for an hour until it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	 "And you should ensure that the bloodletting is done from this vein or another nearby vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	 "And if there remains in the area for a few days some blackness or greenish color, do not be concerned; and if you wish, place on it some cause of aloe and dissolved myrrh, or some cause of mint juice, or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	 "And often these abscesses and swellings require phlebotomy from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	 "So place your hand on it, and if you find softness, press harder on it, for that swelling is dangerous; and then be careful to place on it some of the remedies mentioned earlier, because blood will flow heavily from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And make a plaster with water in which there is astringency, so that the area may be hardened, and then treat it with another treatment until it heals.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	 And it is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the prevailing color on the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	 Because if the blood is black, then you let it bleed until it becomes red; and likewise if you see it is thick, then you let it bleed until it is thinned; and likewise if it is sharp, then you let it bleed until its sharpness is removed.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	 And it is necessary for one who is full and strong and needs bloodletting in one go, that the venipuncture of the vein be increased and the venipunctures be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	 And in one who is weak, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary that such a person bleed in several stages, and that the wound be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	 And the best way to administer venipuncture is for it to be a transverse incision, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	 And this method of venipuncture is safe from excessive bleeding and injury to nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than venipuncture according to length and width.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	 And to which it is customary for fainting to occur, before bloodletting, you must care for that person by giving them a little bread soaked in honey or vinegar mixed with water; and extract from the patient's blood three or four times.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	 And if the cause is a cold complexion, before bloodletting, give them bread soaked in syrup of myrrh or in honey syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar; or in strongly scented syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	 And if fainting occurs during bloodletting and is caused by the loss of too much blood, then give them water with meat and strongly scented syrup to drink; use aromatics like lavender, and anoint their feet with it.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	 And for the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	 And if one wants to open their arm and dissolve their blood gradually, it is appropriate for the person who is having bloodletting for excessive evacuation and whose strength is weak, that they extract blood little by little, according to the quantity of their strength on continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	 "But if someone wants to draw blood from the body, either in the opposite direction of the affected area or towards it, it is necessary that this be done on the second day or the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	 "But in a body where there is much blood that has been cut and it becomes hot and causes fever, it is necessary to remove the blood from him at once, and a large quantity should be removed, and the opening should be enlarged until fainting occurs, because you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on his pulse while removing the blood, so that he does not die instead of fainting, for often this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	 "And it is not necessary when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood for a second time, once the orifices of the vein have already closed and it has become difficult to draw blood, that you press very hard on it; rather, bend and stretch it gently, because this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	 "Hold the linen in place until it is fleubotomized a second time; or remain with the heat of the flebotomist that coagulates the blood in the orifices of the vein; or place on it a plaster of theriac alfarach, or of sagzenea, and press gently on it until the blood has been drawn out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	 And if the vein is infected, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the infection has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	 And if necessity compels you to bleed the patient, and there is no other option, then do so on that same spot or in another vein of the opposite arm.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	 And the vein called "cord of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the median or basilic veins when they cannot be found or are hidden, as it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	 And the method of phlebotomy for him is that the patient immerse their hand in hot water until the skin turns red and the vein becomes clearly visible.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	 And then it should be tightly bound with a bandage of moderate strength; and then phlebotomize according to the transverse direction, not longitudinally or along its length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	 And make an incision that is wide and phlebotomize with the instrument you use to bleed it, making a small cut at the wrist.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	 And if the flow of blood is inhibited, then immerse the hand in hot water and allow the blood to run into the water until you achieve your goal.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	 If you are in the days of summer, then you are exempt from immersing your hand in hot water, and instead, the body is bathed in hot water during wintertime.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	 And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because after it there is neither a pulsatile vein nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	 And the phlebotomy of the little finger on the right hand is suitable for liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	 And the technique for its phlebotomy is to strengthen the hand with a bandage or your own hand, after you have placed it in hot water until the vein is inflated and well visible; then perform the transverse phlebotomy; and if you cut that one completely, there will be no consequence.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	 Be careful not to end the phlebotomy with your hand, because after that are the exposed nerves of the aforementioned (veins).
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	 Then immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not immerse your hand in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the opening of the vein and prevent further bleeding.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	 And when the blood is extracted according to the necessary amount, then you should place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not clot immediately; and similarly, it is necessary for you to do this in every narrow branch.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	 However, the benefit of phlebotomy on the left side is that it is beneficial for illnesses of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	 And do likewise in his phlebotomy as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	 And the benefit of phlebotomy from the saphenous vein is for illnesses that are below the body, such as uterine diseases, retained menstruation, and skin and leg ulcers, both old and new, as well as similar conditions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	 And the manner of performing phlebotomy on him is that the patient immerse his foot in hot water and rub it until the veins appear; then bind a ligature around the ankle; and where the vein called the dorsal venous network appears, from there branches spread out across the surface of the foot like tree roots.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	 Therefore, phlebotomize the thickest and lowest branch below the ankle towards the heel of the patient, for it is better and safer.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	 And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be cautious of the nerves that lie beneath the surface of the foot. Perform your phlebotomy with the tool used to pierce, as if you were slicing through it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	 And let the phlebotomies be visible.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	 But if the issuing of blood is forbidden, then immerse his foot in hot water and let the blood flow into it until it has been evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then try with the phlebotomy tool a little higher, for the place is healthy; and do not fear the evil, but be cautious of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	 And similarly, do the same with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	 And regarding the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is beneath the heel, below the junction of the wild part.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	 And the aid to his phlebotomy is at the level of the hip when it is for bloodletting.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	 And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient enters the bath, and quickly and strongly binds his calf from the hip down to the heel in four turns with a long, fine bandage, so that it does not appear except for this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	 Here's the translation of the provided text:
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	 Based on the context and similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	 And be careful with the nerves, and make enough blood flow.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	 Then immediately release the constriction and place on the location of the phlebotomy a cloth and strengthen the area, because it heals quickly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	 About cupping therapy and the qualities of using these [therapies].
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	 Cups are made of horn, or glass, or glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	 And cupping therapy is done in two ways: one way is with scarification and bloodletting, and the other way is without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	 And this cupping therapy that is done without scarification is done in two ways, because it is either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	 And to the cups that are administered with scarification and bloodletting there are fourteen places on the body where cups are placed: one of which is alnocrati, and it is the last part of the head; and the middle place of two parts of the neck together; and cups under the chin below the jawbone, below the mouth; and cups of two shoulders; and cups of alohoster, and they are on the end of the ribs; and cups of two fingers, and they are on two arms; and cups of two elbows; and cups of two hips.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	 Based on the pattern of the previous text, here's a line-by-line translation:
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	 But if necessity requires inducing vomiting due to illness or pregnancy, administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end, and in the middle of the month, and whenever necessary.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	 And the cause is that in men, when blood is increased to the point of needing extraction through vomiting and they find heaviness and coldness on their head; or those who find fullness and heat in their face, head, and neck; or those who find paleness in their face and forehead and darkness and dullness in their eyes; or those who vomit in the wrong place; or those whose laughter is increased; or those who taste blood in their mouth, or have a coated tongue and spit blood; or those whose sleep is increased, or who see blood during sleep, along with anxiety and plagues, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	 Therefore, whenever any of these causes are present, especially if it occurs in the third or middle of the month, vomiting should be induced after two or three hours have passed since the day began.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	 And assistance for vomiting from the back of the neck is that when this causes heaviness in the head and it feels sunken into the eyes, but it would be better if this were an evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	 And this bloodletting is in the location of phlebotomy of the cephalic [vein].
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	 And it is not permitted to use one who has completed a cold, or who has catarrh, because that causes great harm to the patient.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	 And therefore it is not necessary to use those who are old and whose heads are afflicted with coldness.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	 But to the one on whom this is done, forgetfulness occurs; and because of this, it is necessary for you to command the bloodletter to place his hand lightly with the cupping glass at the endings, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	 But cupping on the back is in the location of phlebotomy of the black vein and the basilic vein: and therefore you will cure asthma, and constriction of breath, and cleaving of the breathing instrument, and coughing, and fullness [of the chest].
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	 And it is necessary that the cupping on the back be made lightly, for if it is placed too strongly, it generates weakness in the body and the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	 And cupping on the nape of the neck cures pains in the head, ophthalmia [eye disease], migraine, epilepsy, and toothaches; it is in the location of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	 And it is important that you command the one who applies the cupping therapy not to press too hard with their hand during the scarification process, so as not to cut the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	 And for cupping therapy on the chin, apply alcohol to the mouth, and in case of gum infection, and similar to other diseases that are in the mouth, they stand in the place of venesection from herehics that are in both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	 But for cupping therapy done on both sides of the spine, apply caphatan, which is made by an excess of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	 And for cupping therapy on the two parts inside the armpits, apply the juice from the venesection of three veins: the basilic, jugular, and cephalic veins. Because this attracts blood from all the smaller veins that are in the flesh, and these smaller veins from other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	 And command the person performing the cupping therapy not to proceed too deeply with scarification, because the area is devoid of flesh and only nerves and arteries remain.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	 And it is a type of cupping therapy with which the lower back is treated, and it is applied to hemorrhoids in the rectum and to anal ulcers below them.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	 "And it is necessary that you command the cupping practitioner to use a large cupping glass, and that it be made of clay, because the affected area requires strong suction; and let there be subtle incisions and scraping with a scraper.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	 "But cupping on the hips should be done with utmost precision, because they draw blood from all over the body, and this aggravates old pains in the thighs and legs, as well as in the bladder; it induces menstruation, causing both heat and coldness; and it serves as a substitute for phlebotomy on the temples, the neck, and the heels.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	 "However, they greatly weaken the entire body and cause fainting in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	 "And as for cupping on the neck, the youthfulness of its benefits is close to the youthfulness of cupping on the hips.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	 "And the quality of the cupping placement is that you should place the cup at the beginning of the vein and slide it upwards with moderate suction, without prolonging the position of the cups; rather, place them lightly, leave them briefly, and allow the humors to come to the surface by natural means.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	 And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the area turn red and swell, and the redness of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	 And then you should make a scratch and repeat the suction little by little, and also consider the patient's condition.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	 Because that person who has tender skin and few pores, you should only make one scratch, no more, so that the area is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	 And order the cupping practitioner to enlarge the scarification and prick a little bit more, and always suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	 And if the blood is thick, then you should make two scratches, because in the first scratching the pathway for the blood and its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	 But in the second one, to thoroughly extract the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	 And if the blood is very dark, then make a third scratching so that it may be entirely extracted.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	 Finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or just a small amount, one scratching is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	 And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we scratch with many scratchings; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we should scratch with a deep scratching.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	 And in the process of scarification, the depth is only as much as the tendon.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	 And if the tendon is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the places for the cupping glasses be anointed with gentler, more open, and more resolving substances; in summer, such as oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of cinnamon; and in winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or oil of St. John's wort, or similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	 And if the swelling is large and harsh, then the oil should be of bitter orange, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloe, or oil of aniseed, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	 But if the person to be cupped has wide pores and soft skin, it is fitting that they be prohibited from oil, and it is fitting that for them the places of the cupping glasses before cupping be washed with rose water or strong vinegar, or water of cinnamon, or water of borage, and similar ones.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	 Here's a translation of the given sentence:
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	 And for those whose superfluities are large, wash their openings with old wine, or with water of savory (which is marjoram), or with decoction of dill, or chamomile, and similar herbs.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	 And it is necessary that the enema be administered before bathing; it is also necessary to administer it immediately after bathing for one or two hours, and it is necessary to sleep close to where the enema was given.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	 What should be considered when bleeding a patient before administering an enema?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	 It is important to consider at the beginning: if the person giving the enema or the one who needs to be bled is choleric and has sharp blood and inflammation, then it is necessary for them to take cooling foods such as sorrel, vinegar, endive in sour wine, lettuce, purslane, cucumber, and similar things.  (This passage seems to be suggesting that the person administering the treatment should also follow a certain diet if they have specific humoral characteristics.)
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	 And place their food as such: polenta, and lean bird meats, and foods cooked with vinegar, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	 And for those whose temperament is dry, it is necessary that they drink syrup of almonds or syrup of sumac seeds and a fragrant wine mixture between white and red; and it should be advised to them to use a little food and drink, and place their food as polenta, cabbage, beans, small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	 And it is necessary that on the day of venesection and bloodletting, the drink should be greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	 And it is necessary that in certain hours before venesection or bloodletting, some men be given theriac alpharac, or musk medicine, which is nutmeg, or mace, to comfort the main members and to make the blood more subtle; and they should not take that drink.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	 But the venesections that are without scarification should be those placed on the liver, and above the spleen and gout, and above the navel, in the joints' places, and the bladder of the groin, because these members cannot tolerate scarification upon them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	 And it is not required for those (venesections) except to attract blood from a member, such as placing a venesection on the breast in illness of bloody flux from the nose; and this is used so that the viscous windiness of the member may be dissolved, such as placing (a venesection) on the abdomen and navel; for this rarefies the member, slakes it, and removes the pain because it resolves the windiness.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	 And it has been placed on the testicles when swelling or boils occur there, because by the virtue of attraction it quickly draws out the swelling and eradicates the boils from their place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	 When it is placed over the liver and spleen, you should also puncture these areas to release any trapped wind or gas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	 And these ventoses are administered with suction only; and some times they are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	 And sometimes they are administered filled with lukewarm water in cases of spleen illnesses.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	 And this is why the ventouse should be filled and be larger, which is either hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	 The shape of the ventouse administered with fire: it should have an opening the size of two fingers, as we have made it; and the amount of material should be half a palm's length; and it should be on the back of the patient, in the area where the ribs are, halfway up the back, and the hole should be small enough that only the tip of a needle can fit inside.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	 It should be made of red or yellow copper, with thick rims, smooth and polished so that it does not hurt the member on which it is placed.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	 And in the middle of it should be a transverse iron or steel rod, on which a candle with fire is placed.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	 And this ventouse should be much larger than the one we mentioned earlier; and the smaller ones should be used according to the illness and condition of the patient.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	 "And the cupping methods for children and the weak are different from those for young people and robust individuals.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	 "And the quality of placing this cupping glass with fire on the limb is that you extend the cloth with decent firewood in front of a few wax candles, and place it in the middle of the cross-sectional beam of the cupping glass, so that the fire is lit around the lower part to prevent the patient's body from being burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	 "And then it is placed on the patient's limb, and the finger is on the hole we mentioned, until when we have the cupping glasses and do not need to remove the finger, steam will rise over that hole, at which point the cupping glass will immediately be removed.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	 "And then the cloth is ignited according to its manner, and it is repeated if needed.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	 "However, in the case of cupping for pleurisy, it is done with water, and there is no cross-sectional beam or hole, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the limb only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	 "And this is its shape: And this cupping glass, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	 Certainly! Please provide the text you would like me to translate from your medieval medical treatise.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	 And the quality of using those which you have found bloodsuckers that are in the muddy waters of decay.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	 And first, let them be laid in the day and night in muddy water until they are faint, and that no cause remains in their belly; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping; and then rub the limbs of the patient until they redden; and then place them on him.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	 And when they are full and satisfied.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	 And if possible, suck the area with a cupping glass, it is more effective for healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	 And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with warm water; and rub and squeeze it out.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	 And if the body's blood flow is prolonged near the application of leeches, and it sweats, then you dip a cloth in cold water and place it on top until the sweating subsides.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	 And if the blood is profuse, then sprinkle on it powdered vitriol or kermes and other similar astringent substances until the bleeding stops; or place cooked broad bean pods on the area, and let them lie there until the beans stick to the area and the bleeding stops.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	 And it is necessary, if required, to repeat bloodletting when it is possible to replace them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	 And if bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then the area should be rubbed with fresh blood or an injection should be placed in the spots until blood comes out; and it should be paused immediately, because those that feel any blood will quickly recover.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	 And when you want them to heal, sprinkle a little powdered aloe, salt, or ash over the wounds, and they will heal quickly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	 Thus begins the prologue of the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	 This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of bone fractures and dislocations.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	 Oh, son, know that many foolish doctors and laypeople boast about this chapter, those who at any time do not respect the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	 And for this reason it is done that this manner of the wise in our land is hidden; and I have not forgotten this at any time but rather everything; and I have not added anything to what follows, except after a long study of the books of the Ancients and reflection on their meaning, until I extracted the knowledge from them.  /> And know, son, that in this chapter we will speak of five things: first, about the signs by which one can know if a bone is fractured or dislocated; second, how to reduce the broken or dislocated bone to its original place; third, how to keep it there until it is healed; fourth, what foods and drinks are good for the patient to take during this time; fifth, about the signs by which one can know if the bone has been restored to health.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	 And now I will direct my efforts towards experiments and studies for the remainder of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	 I have already described everything that my knowledge and experience include in this chapter; and since I have shortened it for you and freed you from the task of elaboration, I have also shortened it at the end of all shortenings; and I have shown it at the end of explanations; and I have formed many forms of the instruments used in it, as is done by adding explanations, as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	 Chapter one.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	 Summary and collections concerning the essence of bone fractures, from which necessary preface is required before we begin to recall the members that are broken and diverse in each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	 Therefore, in the preface of this chapter, we will state the main points of the argument; and we will discuss the chapters whose understanding at the beginning is necessary for the artists to be firmly established on the truth of those [chapters]; so that it may be you and others who are prompt in learning or knowing this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	 And so I say that when some fracture, dislocation, twist, or fall occurs, then you should begin with phlebotomy or bloodletting, or both together, if no cause prohibits it, such as weakness of strength, or it is a child to whom it happens, or an old person in decrepitude, or it is the time of very hot weather, or of very cold [weather].
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	 This text seems to be discussing dietary restrictions or recommendations for a patient with joint pain caused by cold humors. Let's break it down:
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	 And then return the patient to his original state or condition with which he is accustomed to.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	 And so when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods of thick and heavy consistency, such as dishes made from boiled wheat with water, rice, heads, hooves, stomachs, livers, fresh lungs, fatty meat similar to these, and with this regimen, the bone fracture heals more easily and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	 And know that broken bones in those who are in their first youth and in the elderly cannot be continued and healed according to their nature due to the dryness of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	 And they are healed and continued according to their nature always because of the dryness of those members, and they are continued and healed in those who are at the end of their youth, such as the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	 But nevertheless nature adjusts and attaches over the broken bone from every side similar to glue in which there is a thick substance that adheres and strengthens it until it is completely conglutinated and united together, until it reaches the end of strength and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, until any cause prevents it from its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And for this reason, it is necessary to pause the food of the patient, food that is heavy and viscous and thick, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	 Different types of fractures according to different members (limbs).
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	 And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture in the bone of the thigh is different from a fracture in the bone of the head; and a fracture in the bone of the foot is different from a fracture in the bone of the hand; and similarly, all the other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	 And I come with the memory of every type of fracture, each one explained in its own separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	 About the diversity of fractures within themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	 And the types of bone fractures are also diverse within themselves; for some fractures are curved, others straight; and sometimes fractures occur according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the splinters and chips that protrude and do not protrude, just as it is done in a feather when it is prepared to be written, and there are fractures with bruising and tearing in the head, and there are small cracks.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	 Here is a translation of the given sentence into English:
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	 "Mota senhal de fractura del os" translates to "A clear sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	 "And by this it is known to be a bone fracture: there is a twist in it, and a swelling or prominence felt upon touch, and a cracking sound when you press on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	 "And therefore, when there is no apparent twisting or cracking sound upon your touch, and the patient does not feel great pain when you shake the bone, then it is not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	 "However, it is possible that there is a twist or small fissure, therefore do not move the bone with your hand and apply pressure all over; then place on it of the medicines which are remembered at this moment which suit the place; and then bind it tightly for a precise compression.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	 "And know that when the place is curved and not split in two or another such thing happens to it that it becomes completely separated from its counterpart, then you should begin immediately with straightening it, but beware that an abscess forms on it.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	 "And if an abscess forms on it, then leave it alone for some days until the abscess subsides; and then drain it in any way you can with levity and skill.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	 "And know that the restoration and cauterization of it is easier than that of the bone in which such a fracture occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	 "Then strengthen the one who will follow with the memory of him.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	 "But if there is a fracture in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb, whether it is the hand or foot; with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or one rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	 "And let your position be such that you place the limb in its natural form while the broken parts of the member are extended; then you should strive to return those additions with skill and in whatever manner you can put them back into their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	 "And be careful according to your strength that no pain or injury occurs to the patient due to your operation; and strive according to your ability to apply one bone to its companion in the best way.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	 "And it is necessary that at that time you touch it with your hand, and if you find any different cause here, correct it and make it equal according to the amount of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	 "And avoid excessive stretching and compression, as many foolish doctors do who, with their improper operations, cause a painful abscess to form due to their operation, or cause contraction in the limb, as we have seen this occur due to the operation of their unskilled hands.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	 And immediately after that, you should proceed with a proper balance and careful operation of tightening the affected member, ensuring rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and ensure that they do not disturb it during their waking hours or sleep, observe its rotation and movement, and monitor all their movements with all their strength; and wait to see if the position of the member is such that it is guaranteed to be pain-free, because when one feels pain or injury in the position of the member, then it is necessary to change it to another position where there is no pain; and ensure that this position is straight and even, so that the member does not become twisted when restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	 And the quality of tightening the calm member is what I recommend; for you to know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and largeness and in their form.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	 And for those that are small, such as the arm and finger and toe, similar to these, then the wrapping should be of fine, soft cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	 But for those that are large, such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary that there be a strong and hard wrapping, because a strong wrapping connects the large member with equal strength from all sides, so that in it no stain enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	 And now begin, start your evacuation of excrement, place appropriate bandages on that for the break, over the area of that fracture with three or four wrappings depending on the member's size; and strengthen your hand slightly with the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	 And now come to that part which is superior to the place of the fracture, and strengthen more so that you do not break your bandage with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	 And now lengthen yourself with a wrapping of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the bandage little by little, until you take from the place a great length.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	 And now take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken place with wrapping, and now come to the wrappings below the fracture; and let your operation be in the tightness of the wrapping and in softening it according to what we have said in the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	 And now place between the wrappings of linen or cloth with which the crookedness of the fracture is equalized, if there is any crookedness in it; and if not, do not place anything there for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	 And now place another bandage over it, and now equalize over these wrappings a moderate number of nails made immediately, if in the place there is no swelling or pustule, and then place on it something that draws out the pustule and removes the swelling; and leave it for some days; and then strengthen over it with nails. 》
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	 And let the stilts of the main part be made of reeds, well-formed and woven together; or they may be made of pine wood; or from palm branches. And let each stilt be as wide as this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	 However, the stilt that is placed on the fracture should be a little thicker and wider than the other stilts, and the length of the stilt should correspond to the size of the limb in magnitude and smallness; then strengthen the stilts with another bandage according to your first binding method; and then tie it on top with a proper ligature as we have said about binding, and let your binding be closer to the location of the fracture, and the longer it is from the fracture, the less strict the binding should be.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	 And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and they should be of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of some foolish people who put their threads of twisted rope, it is a great mistake, because when the binding becomes equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	 Similarly, very fine threads are not suitable because you will not achieve with them what you want in the binding, and it is not necessary that there be more than a finger's width between stilt and stilt.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	 And if the patient is affected by the ends of the stars near the constriction in those places, then place underneath them a piece of wool or flannel until it does not cause harm to him.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	 Sometimes a fracture is with a wound, and there occurs a rupture in the tendon, and I will come to remember that in the chapter according to specificity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	 And know that not every broken member is immediately tightened with stars on the first day; the reason for this is that when the member is large, you should not place stars on it except after about five or seven days, or more, according to your certainty of avoiding an abscess carefully.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	 And this is the manner of plasters with which the ancients restored fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	 Method of plaster as an overview for restoring fractures, suitable for many complications and especially for women and children, because it does not cause heat or cold: and it is that you take the powder from the mill, which is the marrow of the flour that sticks to the sides of the millstone in the mill walls.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	 And prepare it thus as it is, except that you sieve it with egg white, and make the mixture of it neither too thick nor too thin; and then use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	 Here's the translation for your provided text:
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	 All should be crushed in a mortar with great effort, and they should be sieved, and they should be mixed with water or egg white and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	 Method for making a plaster for dislocated joints and separated bones, when pain occurs in those areas and in tears or breaks: take clean wool and soak it in vinegar and cypress oil, then place it on the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	 However, this plaster does not have the virtue of restoration, but rather of preventing pus and relieving pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	 Another method for a plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of wild fig tree and leaves of wild poppy, grind them all together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	 Method of quick plaster for the restoration of a fractured bone and when you want to resolve the remaining pus: take roots of mallow, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, and pea flour, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix with vinegar, if the limb is not cut.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	 But if it is cut, then mix it with water of moist coriander or water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	 Certainly! Let's break down the sentence into parts and translate it step by step:
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	 "But in Gaul it has been seen that they are placed on the broken member before its restoration and for the causes of which there is a small amount of heat, such as myrrh, ginger, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	 "Manner of making a plaster for wounds and pain: take half a measure of chickpeas, the same amount of human hair shavings or goose feathers, and of flax, and salt, all divided equally; they should be ground, sifted, and cooked to make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	 "But the quantity of which it is necessary that the plaster remains adhered and then be removed depends on whether there has been pain or swelling or if the bone is broken and displaced from its place; in this case, you should not remove the plaster for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	 "And if there is severe pain or swelling or inflammation at the site, then you must immediately remove or loosen that [plaster], and take it off from him.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	 "And take a cloth and a sponge soaked in warm water, and immerse it in tepid water, and with it wash the area until the swelling ceases and the pain is relieved; then let the member rest for an hour; then place on it wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rosemary oil, and bind it for a night until you are sure that the abscess is cautious, and the inflammation of the member subsides, and its pain is removed.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then apply a thin and small plaster carefully, ensuring that the area is clean, and use a small amount of liquid to moisten it for healing.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	 And if you see that the abscess and redness and pain and inflammation and all the symptoms have completely disappeared, and you no longer need plasters and restrictions, then apply a similar treatment as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	 And if nothing happens to the limb from any of the causes mentioned earlier, then do not remove it before three or four days, sometimes even five or seven; and in some cases, everything is left for twenty days, depending on how the member's loosening appears, as we have said, until the fracture heals and the flesh coagulates over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	 Then tighten the restriction more than your first one, and adjust it according to the patient's condition, as you were previously instructed.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	 However, if you see that the area of the fracture is dried and more atrophied than necessary, know that nutrition should not reach it; therefore, always soak it with lukewarm water before removing it; and let this be done every three days; ease the restriction a little, and by this process, the nutrients will flow into the member, and it will heal more easily.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	 Based on the pattern you've provided and the similarities between the given text and Latin, Spanish, Italian, and French, here's a possible translation of the sentence:
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	 And I have not seen anyone do this, which is why it is more reasonable that it should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	 Chapter two: On fractures occurring in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	 The types of fractures are many, and their figures are varied, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are caused by a blow with a rod, and the blow breaks all the bone into pieces, which then fall to the ground just like this happens in a log, and because of this, this type is called comminuted. Or the rod cuts off part of the bone, and cuts through the flesh without penetrating completely; and this type of fracture is called simple greenstick fracture.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	 The wound of these two fractures is either large or small, and the fracture is either crushed or torn. And the cause of it is a blow with a hammer or falling on a stone, and so forth.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	 And this fracture can either be penetrating, approaching the skin beneath the bone; or it can be in the surface of the bone, and the wound of these two fractures is either large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	 And there is another type of fracture that occurs within the bone, in the fineness of the hair-like structures, and for this reason, this type of fracture is called a hairline fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	 This text appears to describe a bone fracture caused by either a fall or the impact of something hard like a stone, which results in a piece of the bone breaking off and moving into the surrounding tissues. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	 And this is especially done in the bodies of small children, such as infants' heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	 And for all these kinds of fractures, pieces are used just like separate stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	 And I will come with a reminder of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	 And you should recognize all these kinds of fractures by inspection and by testing their tension and removal of decayed flesh from them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	 And the greenstick fracture is recognized because it is exposed on the bone, and it is washed, and bandaged over it with tension, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	 But in the treatment of fractures, first consider the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the accidents that they signify clearly fear, such as vomiting from anger, extension, loss of consciousness, absence of voice, syncope, acute fever, excretion of urine, and redness of the eyes, and similar to these in the major dispositions, without doubt it will not heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	 And if you see non-serious accidents, then you hope for health; in that case, you begin the treatment of him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	 The reason for this is that if the patient comes to you at the beginning of the illness as he was ill and this happens in the winter days, then you should study the removal of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	 And if it is in the summer days, then it is necessary to remove the bone in front of the seventh day, having that which is under the bone be corrupted by the fat, and that the accidents we have mentioned occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	 And if the fracture has already reached the fat covering the brain, and it is with small broken pieces and dust, then it is necessary to cut the crushed and ground piece, as I will tell you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	 And it is that you shave the patient's head, and discover over the bone according to custom and manner as possible for you according to the figure of the wound, and that it be light on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	 And if it happens to you that you need to detect the bone, flow of blood or pus, then you should place a compress on it with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the area with cloth soaked in wine and olive oil, and make the wound rest until the pus settles, and you are sure of the bleeding; and then begin with the cutting around the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	 And this is according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And one method is that you cut the bone with a narrow chisel like this, and this is its shape: And then administer another chisel of this type, slightly wider than the previous one; and this is its shape:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	 And then administer more of the disinfectant after than the second [application].
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	 And it is fitting that you have a variety of disinfectants, some of which are thicker than others; and some are shorter than the others and are at the end in terms of sharpness, and they should be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	 And use them easily by striking on the disinfectants to ensure that the head does not touch and harm it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	 And if the bone is hard and strong, then it is necessary to bore through it with a drill before administering the disinfectants with the probes, which are called non-penetrating probes.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	 And they are not called this way only because those do not reach the end of the bone to where it is appropriate, but rather because the probe has a round tip or edge at its end which resembles a small sharp margin or circle, preventing it from being submerged and penetrating the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	 And it is convenient that you take a great number of these probes, each of which should be suitable for the thickness of each bone, so that they are all present in all the bones of the brain with sharp ends, and their length and breadth should correspond to the thickness of those bones.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	 Here's the translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	 And then make an incision with a scalpel between each bone in the joint, making it as delicate and precise as possible. Continue this process until you have removed all of the bones or until some other cause requires you to use instruments such as tweezers and fine forceps, which you should have prepared for this purpose.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	 And it is important that you take care to ensure that the scalpel does not touch any part of the skull.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	 And once you have removed the bone and it is connected to the skull, and you have separated it, use a rasping instrument similar to a scalpel but thinner and more delicate than other scalpels to smooth out the rough edges of the bone.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	 And if there are any small fragments of bone left, take them out easily with the appropriate instrument you have on hand; then proceed to treat the wound with linen and ointments as we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And another way to perform the operation is light and far from fear, which they call Gaul's cut and praise it greatly; and here are his words: "It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone where the fracture is most intense and apparent. Once you have exposed that part and placed underneath it the tip of a long, thin, and delicate scalpel, like this one:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	 Here's my attempt at translating the provided sentence:
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	 And then you should strike the incision of a part with a small hammer until all the bones are cut through easily, as it has been revolved (described or explained before). Make sure that no accident happens to the fatty layer, for which you might be afraid in any way. And if the doctor is the most foolish and ignorant person among all men; certainly, and if he is asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	 And if there remains any connected cause in the bones of the fatty layer in some bone places, he should cut that from him with the pointed end of the scalpel, and remove it with ease, for it is removed from him without harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	 And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the fatty layer, and what is cut off or taken away from the bone is its surface, and roughness and subtle splinters remain, then it is necessary to shave away that roughness and remove those splinters with very fine razors, which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can use them in all places where they are most convenient and most appropriate for that operation on the broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	 And you should use in your razor the one with which you first shave the bone, and then use progressively finer ones until you reach the finest of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	 In any of the other small, superficial, or subtle fractures, it is necessary to administer care according to what was lost for its correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	 And this is why it cannot be cured by everyone who has studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	 And we will discuss what we have written about large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	 And if the skin is torn when you extract the bone, then take cloth according to the size of the wound and soak it in rose oil, and place that on the opening of the wound; then take another cloth, folded or tripled, and soak it in vinegar and rose oil and place that over the first cloth and press as lightly as possible on it, so as not to harm the patient; then apply plaster, but do not tighten it except for the size of the wound only.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	 And leave it with this care for one day or two until you are sure that the abscess is cautious; then unbind it and then administer medicines that cause dryness, such as linseed oil and powder of lentils and of sesame seeds, and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	 And it is that you make of these medicines a powder which should be sprinkled over the wound, as they are dry; and universally, administer in him all medicine whose property is such that it cleanses and does not cause irritation.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	 And be careful according to your skill that the wound in your care is clean; and there should be no ignorance of ointment or anything else on it; nor allow virulence to increase within him; for when it is placed on the thin layer of skin, it corrupts and poisons that, and causes a malignant illness to come upon the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	 And it occurs in the cavity of the skull, especially when the bone is exposed and the care is neglected, and there is darkness on its surface; therefore consider if these accidents happen to the patient, as we have said, know that it is fatal without any doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 And if darkness does not occur due to the medicine placed on it, and it is in the power of that medicine to cause that darkness, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and with those anoint a cloth, and then place that over the cavity; and then care for it with the appropriate healing substances until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	 "Capitol" in medieval texts typically refers to a chapter or section of a treatise. So, based on your previous translation, "Capitol .iii." likely means:
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	 "On the restoration of the nose when it is crushed.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	 "Know that the nose is not broken but rather split into two superior parts simultaneously, or one of those parts may be slightly dislocated, because in it there are two bones, and the lower part is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, but rather only bruised and twisted and curved.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	 "But if one of the two parts is broken, then you should insert your finger into his nose and close the fracture from within with your index finger, and push outward with your thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	 "And this should be done by you carefully, and ensure that you do not cause pain to the patient during your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	 "And if the fracture is in the more superior part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be equalized with the tip of a reed that has been slightly enlarged.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	 "And if the fracture is in both parts, then you will proceed in the same manner.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	 "And be sure to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then approach it on the seventh or tenth day after the swelling has subsided.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	 And immediately insert into the tip of the nose a cloth wick of linen, if the break is in one part, or place two wicks, if the break is in two parts, and let it be in the larger wick of such quantity that it fills the nostril hole.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	 And some of the old healers say that the wicks should be wrapped in linen and changed every day, but I have not seen this myself; it is better for the wick to be wrapped in egg white combined with powdered myrrh; and then let the wick rest until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	 And sometimes it is necessary to insert into the nose, in place of a wick, a small sponge wrapped in linen cloth; and let this be done if the break of the nose is very severe and if the patient is not able to breathe.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	 And for this reason it is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, do wicks.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	 And if another time a hot abscess occurs, apply a plaster to the nose with wax or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of your sentence:
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	 And if an injury occurs inside the nose, then it is necessary to cure that with hot compresses and administer lead catheters until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	 Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	 On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	 When the jaw has been broken and the break is not due to injury, look then if the break is only on the outside and not broken in two and bent at the inside parts, then its diagnosis is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	 And therefore, if the break is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the break is in the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and with that push the swelling of the fracture inside towards the outside parts with your other hand from the outside of the bone; with that you can straighten it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	 And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer an extension of both parts according to straightness until their union is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	 And if there is a disruption of the teeth due to shock, then strengthen those which you hope will remain with gold or silver wire or silk thread; and then place wax over the broken jaw, and then place a double layer of cloth over it, and place over that a large, well-made bandage or a sole of leather equal to the length of the jaw; and then bind it above according to how you are accustomed to binding it and as is suitable for the application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	 And command the patient to rest and remain calm, and give him sparse meals.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	 And if you think the shape has already been altered in any way, then wait and remove it on the third day; and then correct that which is altered from him and plaster it with powder of mastic, egg white, or cumin flour, after you have removed the wax from him, and place wool over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	 And when the plaster is thus attached and adjusted to him, and the bone’s position has not been altered, leave it in place until he is healed and strengthened, for many times this fracture becomes strong within three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	 And if it so happens that an abscess forms, then administer what has been said many times before in his sedation until he is healed and the abscess is removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	 And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or splinters; then you should be careful to remove those splinters with what is appropriate for removing them from the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should widen it with a fleam according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	 And after you have removed those splinters and nothing remains from them, then you should enlarge the opening of the wound if it is large; but if not, place one of the appropriate plasters on it that heals and seals it until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	 Chapter 5
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	 Of the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	 Often, the collarbone is broken from a fall in front, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	 Because it is broken, separated, or split into two parts without splinters; and it is easy to restore it; or it happens that there are splinters in it, and its restoration is difficult; or it happens that the break is with a wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	 And the operation for this, when the fracture is without a wound, is that you have two assistants present, so that one supports and follows the broken collarbone, and the other extends the neck toward the injured area.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	 And then you should bring the fracture together with your fingers until it is properly aligned, without any bumps or hollows.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	 And if you need more extension, then place a pillow or woolen cloth under the patient's head, with its size according to your necessity; stretch and raise the neck support (furcula) and shorten the pillow with your hand until it fits the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	 And if you cannot move the end of the neck support to the outer sides due to it being close to the chest, then the patient should be laid back on their head, and place a medium-sized cushion on their chest muscles.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	 And have the assistant press on the patient's chest muscles towards the sides until the neck bone is lifted up to its original position in the chest, then you can straighten the fracture and align it with your hands.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	 But if you feel sharp edges or splinters of the neck bone and they are bothersome, then it is necessary to cut into that area and remove those splinters with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if it is stuck in the bone, then you should ingeniously make an incision with one of the scalpels that you have prepared for this purpose, after placing under the neck bone the instrument used to saw; and this instrument can be made of wood or iron, and its shape is as follows:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	 And it is similar to the cuirass which this is the cavity; and let its length be according to what you need from it, whether it is for a large or small bone.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	 But let its length be suitable for the operation; that it has two ends like this, and one end is wide while the other is narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	 And if the wound you have cut when extracting the arrow from the bone is wide, and you are sure that there will be no abscess, then you sew together the two lips of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	 And if the wound is small or you fear an abscess, then fill the wound with cloths and bandages according to the size of the cut of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	 And if an abscess forms, then insert a cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil and wine into it, and place it on top.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	 But the contraction of the bone, when there is no wound and no cut, is that you place a plaster made from ground flour and egg white on it, and then place a stopper on top. And then place a sphere under the tip of it, if you need to, and then take a bandage, which is what the Saracens use, and let it be very long, and its length should be about one palm or thereabouts; and then place double-layered cloths over the stopper and the plaster; and then take a thin wooden board whose length is three fingers and of similar length; and then wrap that in cloth, and then wrap that cloth with the board on the spot over the fracture site; and then place bandages as it is needed, and turn it around the patient's neck and under the tip of him and under the tip of the patient, and bring it back all around, and whenever the contraction of the fracture decreases, that is what you should not hide from yourself.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	 And also, ensure that the splint is not too tight over the broken bones; therefore, it is necessary for you to check the patient each day, and when the bandage becomes softened or you see the splint starting to shift, then you should correct this and strengthen the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	 And then place the patient's head on their neck, and under their chin place a small cushion during the night, so that with this the ligaments of the throat are lifted from the back, and thus the fracture of the furcula is also elevated due to the elevation of the muscle; or tie the patient's arm to their neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	 And do not untie the bandage unless you see pus or an abscess in the place within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	 And then renew the plaster if you have seen swelling on it, and adjust in the constriction and restore that, and leave until the fracture of the furcula is restored and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	 And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the moon in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it is done in a month's time of that.
Capitol .vi.	 Chapter VI
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	 On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	 Based on the pattern and context of the previous translations, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	 Based on the given context and language patterns, here's a line-by-line translation of the sentence:
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	 If the blade is concave in some places of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with wax, and then raise the blade to make it even.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	 And then strengthen it from above with a long bandage, bound tightly and firmly so that the blade is not moved from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	 And check the bandage every day; and if it is loosened, bind it again and strengthen and straighten the blade if it has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	 And keep the patient on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	 And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	 And therefore, when this number of days has passed, then you should remove the bandage, and know that it is safe, because this is about bones, whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	 And if it concerns the place of the bone that presses and causes pain, then you should cut open that area, remove it, and act as we said in the case of a splinter or abscess that might occur here.
Capitol .vii.	 Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	 On the restoration of a broken foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	 The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of it, and this delays healing; but the ends of it move easily and are separated and shattered.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	 And of the accidents that occur when its middle part is broken, it causes a decline in internal functions and great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, strong fever, and vomiting blood; and it is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and cannot be hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	 And the restoration of it is that the patient be laid on their back, and a cushion be placed between their shoulders; then press the muscles together, and adjust the ribs with the hands of two assistants, and be skilled in the operation and in the equalization according to all possible manners and what is convenient for this, until the shape of the bone returns as it should.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	 Then place on the patient plaster and cloth, and on top of that a thin board made of willow or hazel or something similar in lightness; after wrapping it in linen, be careful to bind it over the broken bone so that it is not moved; and go with the bandage according to the roundness of the back several times, and strengthen that with decent tightness; and always consider the bandage, and when it becomes softened, strengthen it again.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Capitol .viii.	 Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	 On the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	 Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in large places such as the back; and at the ends of their division towards the front, this condition does not happen unless it is due to the fact that they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	 And the knowledge of it is not hidden from feeling; you should examine it with your hands.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	 And the restoration should be done in such a way that you enclose the fracture with your hands according to the most possible manner, until it is enclosed as needed. Then apply and strengthen the broken bones with a splint, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	 And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the inside parts, then there will be very intense pain and puncturing for the patient, similar to the puncturing that occurs in pleurisy, because the bone punctures the membrane; and difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood will occur; and this is difficult to cure. ️‍⚕️
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	 And the ancients have dealt with it in a very ingenious way.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	 And of this they said: it is necessary to place food on the patient that causes flatulence and bloating, so that the belly becomes inflated and extended, and thus the fracture is pushed towards the outside parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	 It seems like you're trying to translate a text that appears to be medieval medical advice written in an old Romance language. Here’s a line-by-line attempt at translating the given sentence into English:
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	 And some of them say that it should be placed on the bladder and then sucked with force; this seems logical, but nevertheless it is feared that the bladder will draw the excess fluids to the area due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	 And some of them say: the area should be covered with wool already soaked in hot oil, and poultices should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, ensuring that the bandage wraps around evenly; then proceed to treat the patient with a pleurisy diet and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	 And if the patient experiences severe pain that they cannot endure, and the teeth puncture the membrane, fear for the patient. Then it is necessary to cut open the area, expose the broken rib, and place a tool over it that preserves the integrity of the tissue (as mentioned before), so as to easily cut through the bone and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	 And then we should close the two lips of the wound with stitches if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	 And if an abscess forms inside, then you should cut and press poultices soaked in hot oil over the area, and treat the patient with water that is appropriate for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	 And let him be laid back on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	 Chapter .ix.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	 On the restoration of a broken vertebra of the spine and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	 Sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and later it extends to their cartilage, and similarly to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	 And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider: for if you see their hands are already softened and numb and dead, and they cannot move those nor extend them nor strengthen them, and when you press those with your fingers or prick them with a needle and feel no pain there, then you should know that it is not healed, and in this case the patient will certainly die.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	 And if they move those and feel constriction with your fingers or a needle prick, then you should know that the bone of the neck is safe and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	 And if you see the same in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider the patient's feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	 Then if you see that they are also softened and the same thing happens to them as happened in the hands, and then when he lies on his back, he has urination and defecation without his will, and sometimes he is laid on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you should know that it is mortal, and therefore do not work on his treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	 If no cause of these [ailments] occurs, the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	 And the treatment for it is that you pierce toward the abscess with a heated iron and place over the swollen spine some oil or a mixture of oil and garlic; place this on [the patient] several times a day until the abscess is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	 Then place one of the comforting and soothing plasters, and strengthen it with a bandage; and instruct the patient to rest and be calm and not to sleep on the painful side until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	 And if there is a fracture of the tibia or any other cause that has already separated from it, then it is necessary to place [the patient] on his back and pull out that bone; and then join together the two lips of the wound with stitches if it is large; and then cure it with some ointment until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	 But if the bone is broken at the back of the heel, and it is the end of the shinbone, then you must insert the index finger of your left hand into the anus, and grasp the broken bone with the other hand as evenly as possible; and then place a plaster and splint on [the patient], if you need them, and then strengthen that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	 Certainly! Let's break down the sentence into smaller parts to understand its meaning better:
Capitol .x.	 "Capitol .x." translates to "Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	 "De restauracio de la ancha" translates to "On the restoration of the vein.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	 "Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura." translates to "The bones of the hips are often broken, and if they break, then the fracture in them is only a communication at their extremities and they are inserted in length and decline towards the interior parts; and it happens that the patient experiences pain in the place and punctuation, and the thigh becomes numb when it breaks.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	 "E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu." translates to "And its restoration is that you place your hand over the surface that is above the fracture, which is its shape.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	 "E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural." translates to "And if the fracture is only in its extremity, then you should reduce it according to what appears to you by making an equal reduction so that the surface is similar to its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	 "Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura." translates to "But if the fracture is in the length or has already declined towards the interior parts, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach until you are ready for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	 And therefore, when you have bandaged it, place a plaster on the patient, and then place a wooden or cane splint over it, and bind it tightly so that you do not fear fracture or displacement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	 And bandage the cavity with water so that it is filled until it reaches a tight fit according to its size, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	 However, if a cold abscess forms, then stop the extension of it and its healing until the cold abscess is sedated, and place water over it as described above; and then return to the healing of the patient, and bind it as necessary.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	 And if the bones are shattered or splintered, then you should remove them.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter XI
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	 On the healing of a broken toe
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	 The toe is that which is between the heel and the ball of the foot.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	 And if it is broken, then the healing of it is done in one of two ways. One way is for you to take a thin piece of wood of medium thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	 And there should be ligaments tied at both ends, and then it should be suspended from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	 And follow the patient onto a seat; and then throw their broken arm over the pole until it reaches its middle, where the curve of the pole is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	 And then suspend the patient from that for some serious reason, or let the servant extend him on the sides; and then let the doctor place the fracture with his hands together, until the fracture returns to its proper place.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	 Another way is for the patient to be placed on his back and the hand of his neck tied up; then command two servants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds the feet below him; and each of them extends to their side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	 And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you strengthen on the fracture with a bandage and on that with another bandage, and each of the two servants extends to their two sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	 And therefore, if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, it is necessary that half of the bandage be placed on the little finger and the other below the fracture by the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	 Similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow, it is necessary that the bandage be placed on that place and on that elbow.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	 Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence into English:
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	 If an abscess occurs, leave the constriction for seven days, and place over it a wool cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess softens, then you can drain it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	 And the manner of strengthening it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a bandage of clean cloth around the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that support, and keep your open hand on its muscles.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	 And place the cloth and strengthen the arm over the support so that the arm is in a fixed position, unless you are prevented from doing so by any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	 Then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	 And it is that you place on the fracture that splint which is wider and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers all around.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	 And then strengthen the splints with the constriction that was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	 And it is that your constriction on the place of the fracture should be narrower.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	 And as the fracture is longer, let the constriction be less.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	 Based on the context and the similarity to Latin and Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the sentence:
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if you fear a pus-filled abscess (aposteme), then leave the stricture and the stitches in place for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	 And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days to prevent swelling or inflammation in that area; or it is prohibited for food to reach the member due to an excess of stricture; and therefore, adjust everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	 But if you are confident that none of this will happen, then do not release the bandage until after three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	 And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands should be on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	 And place on the helper a cushion full of wool equally, and at all times of the night or day, make sure that the shape of the broken member is not altered or that the bandage is softened; therefore, adjust everything with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	 And provide the patient's food according to the order that we have mentioned before, so that the food is light at first until they start strengthening; and then it is necessary to make their food thicker.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	 Because it is customary for the helper and the patient's leg to be strengthened in 40 days; and then it is necessary that they be released and a bath should be administered, and the area should be treated with ointments that heal it.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	 And if the fracture is recent, do not remove the bandages and splints until after one day or two months.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	 On the restoration of a fractured arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	 The arm is composed of two bones called the two ulnae; one of them is small and is called the little finger, and the other is large and is placed below the small bone on the lower side.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	 And it often happens that only the larger ulna is broken, or the smaller one, and sometimes both are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	 And when the smaller ulna is broken above, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is faster.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	 And when it is broken below, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	 And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	 Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller ulna above, it is fitting for the doctor to make a small extension with ease until it is equalized.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	 But if the larger ulna is broken, then he should make a more vigorous extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	 And if both needles are held together at the same time, then you should press harder on the needle holder.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	 And you should position the patient's hand in such a way that their arm and hand are extended on a cushion, with the wrist bent upwards, as with all the other positions mentioned before, and the auricular part should be lower than the others, and the patient should be sitting on a low chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	 And there should be a cushion in front of him at the appropriate height for him, so that the patient does not have to work or exert themselves.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	 And then one of the assistants should extend the arm from the wrist down with their own hand or with a bandage, and another assistant should do the same above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	 And then the doctor should envelop the bone until it is reduced in the best possible shape.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	 And if there are splinters in the bone, then you should carefully remove all of them from their place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	 And if a splinter appears that punctures the tendon and you do not hope for its reduction, then you should cut it off and remove it according to the manner we mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	 If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, I have already addressed that in a separate chapter; therefore, take care of it accordingly.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	 And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then take a cloth and make it into a bandage with oil and white wax, ensuring it is between thick and thin, and place a strong cloth over it with a thin tightness until the abscess subsides; then remove the bandage and apply a prepared poultice made from powdered chalk and egg whites, and afterward apply hot stones. And let the stone that is placed on that fracture be the hottest and strongest.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	 And know that the number of stones for the arm is as follows in the major treatments: whether the fracture is in one joint or in two joints together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	 Then place your bandage over the site of the fracture as strongly and as intensely as possible. And when the bandage extends to the parts above the fracture or to the parts below it, moisten the bandage a little more according to what is mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread with which they are tightened should be made of linen, being precisely between thin and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	 And consider the member and the ligament for about ten days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	 And if any cause occurs that requires correction, such as pressure on the affected member, then it is necessary to immerse the member in hot water until the pressure ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	 And let the member not be constricted until it rests, and then return the constriction.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	 And if the constriction has already been softened and the bone has moved back into place, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	 And consider also if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the member due to an excess of constriction, for then it is necessary to soften that a little and let it be for some days until the nourishment reaches that place, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	 But if the patient does not experience any of those causes that we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to release him until about twenty days or around that time.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	 And then the patient's hand should be suspended by his own skill of agitating movements, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	 And know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or forty-two days, or it is quickly healed in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the patient's constitution and the skill of the physician.
Capitol .xiii.	 "Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	 "On the restoration of a finger fracture and related conditions.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	 "Know that in the fingers of the hand and the toes of the feet, it is customary for a break to occur, and it does not happen except when they are struck with some force.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	 "And when a break or injury occurs in the hand, it is necessary for the patient to be seated and placed facing him, centering his gaze on what he sees equally, and then place his injured hand on an extended surface.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	 "Then the attendant should extend the broken bones, and the physician should bandage them together until they are well joined with a good bond.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	 "And at this point it is necessary to place a plaster and cloth on it, so that a post-operative abscess does not occur; then place steel on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	 "However, if the fracture is in the part closest to the palm, and it goes through the belly of the palm, then make something similar to a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to hold it with his broken palm; it should be bound tightly with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	 "And let the steel be covered in leather wrapped in cloth, so that the leather is applied to the palm; and bind it as necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	 If the fracture is in the outer part of the hand, then you should place a steel plate on top and another steel plate underneath in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and then apply the bandage, just as the hand is turned at the wrist between these ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	 And if there is a fracture in any of the bones mentioned above, then if it is a toe, wrap it as needed and strengthen it with the palm; and if you wish, place a small straight plate on it, so that the fracture is raised and not aggravated.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	 However, if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the middle finger, or the index finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be wrapped and bandaged with the same finger; or all of them can be bandaged together continuously, which is better; or place a small plate on top, as we have said for the toe.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	 And consider, in your treatment and then this one, the disposition of a cautious abscess — with your operation — with what is needed when any of these causes occur, as stated in his account.
Capitol .xiv.	 Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	 "On the healing of a broken bone in the hip.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	 "The bones of the hips are often broken and perceived by touch, according to their conversion into the anterior partition and the superior part.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	 "And its healing is done by tightening a bandage over the break and another bandage under the break, while the patient lies face down on their stomach.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	 "And then the attendant extends all of the bandage to its partition according to quality, when the break is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	 "But if it is at the hip joint, then let the bandage be close to the groin towards the thigh, so that its extension may enter there, and another bandage under the break.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	 "And similarly, if the break is at the groin, then let the bandage be made close to the groin, and its extension towards the back parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	 "And then the physician aligns the bone with both of his hands until it is reduced according to its natural shape and the bone is united by a good union; then it is necessary to place a plaster and stricture, lest an abscess occur in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	 "But if it occurs in the patient an abscess, then you leave that for some days until the abscess has ripened and come to a head, and then you return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	 "The stricture of the patient should be done as follows: you must wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, removing excess; then wrap the thigh until it reaches the ankle and the root of the groin.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	 "And insert a long needle between the thigh and the leg near the bone in the divided parts, and let the ends of the needle emerge from the higher part of the two parts, then revolve on the thigh and leg what is left over from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	 "And then place on the thigh in the spot of that fracture thistles, and place one of those thistles on the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	 "And then fill the empty spaces between the thigh and the leg with soft cloths, so that the stricture is tightened.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	 "And then begin with a strong binding in the middle over the spot of the fracture with three or four turns, and the more you approach the spot of the fracture, your binding should be smaller, lighter, and moister.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	 And then release the bandage from that area, so that it does not cause corrosion, aposteme, inflammation or similar conditions on the member; and if any of these conditions occur, then count yourself with an amputation of it, and correct whatever happens as closely as possible, as we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	 But if the pressure is on the bone itself, then you should remove that (pressure) as much as possible; and if not, apply a compress to it and leave it there, and treat with whatever is remembered from before until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	 And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by other things being adjusted to it, as we have said in the arm and in the hand.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	 But nevertheless, in its restoration done in this way, the patient does not experience limping; and if it is restored alone or if the other leg is applied to it, then it is necessary that the one who has always limped continues to do so.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	 And know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a little more or less, and all this is according to the diversity of complexions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	 Capitulo XV (Chapter XV)
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	 On restoring the dislocated hip joint.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	 Know that the dislocation of the hip joint often happens gradually, but it can also occur suddenly.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	 But if it is a dislocation, then it is only a fracture or crack in its parts, and this is either with pain or without pain, and everything depends on the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	 And the restoration of it is such that what is broken from its parts should be made equal with those mentioned until it is joined and united as much as possible by equality, facility, and craftsmanship.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	 Then place a plaster and place it on that round bone, if necessary; and strengthen it with a bandage as appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	 And also consider all the dispositions that we have recommended for other fractures, such as caution with inflammation and similar things, so that nothing happens to it by accident until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	 Capítulo XVI (Chapter XVI)
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	 On restoring the dislocated thigh bone.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	 Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the femur; the other is thin and is called the fibula. ️
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	 And if two bones are broken together, then the leg is reduced to parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	 And if the bone is broken more finely, then the leg is reduced to the front parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	 And if the bone is broken thicker, you will find it below, and this is one of those cases that are not familiar to you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	 Then administer extension, equilibrium, and ligament tying according to the same principle.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	 However, it is necessary, if the leg fracture is jagged and has many splinters, that the extension be less and lighter, and relieve with your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	 And if there is any occasion to operate on the arm due to a similar cause, and when you have aligned the splinters and completed the entire operation, then take wooden sticks that are placed below the cushions that are placed under the sole, and they are made of palm branches; choose those with small thickness, not being too thick, and let their length be according to the length of the arm, and insert them from within outwards.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	 Then wrap each in a cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one on the broken part of the leg on one side and the other on the opposite side, and let them be from within outwards to the lowest part of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	 And then you place the two splints in three places: at both ends and in the middle, because with this structure the leg is prevented from tilting to the right or left side, and it remains stable.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	 And then a splint made of wood is administered according to the length of the leg, and the leg is placed on it so that it retains its stability.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	 And it is particularly important that you do this in the case of a fracture, and when there is significant injury present.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 And then you should observe the leg daily and study it closely for any changes, ensuring that there is no pus or swelling or other similar issues; if such an issue arises, then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	 Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	 The ankle does not fracture entirely; rather, the bones of the foot sometimes fracture; and the toes of the foot rarely fracture, and they only suffer bruising in most cases.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	 And if the bones of the foot are fractured and they find themselves raised above each other, then instruct the patient to place their foot on the ground as if they were walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	 Based on the given context and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	 And then place a plaster and cloth on top of it, and place under the foot a small board with two flat surfaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	 And then strengthen it by extending the foot, since you have wrapped it with cloth and other necessary materials.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	 And when three or four days have passed, then you should remove the bandage, for you will find that the bones are either swollen, or bent, or dislocated, and the treatment for these is as follows:
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	 However, if some bones are bent, then you should restore those and swell those as I have recommended to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	 And then place a splint on the bent toe according to its length and slightly wider than it; and then under the foot the previously mentioned board, and strengthen it with appropriate traction.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	 However, if that which is bent in the bones are two or three or more, then you should place on each toe a splint of its quantity wrapped in linen cloth; and strengthen the board at the sole of the foot, with one end of the board under the arch of the foot so that it holds it well.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	 And it is advisable for you to remember that you do not neglect to consider all the causes mentioned in other accidents that we have discussed; and be prepared for any accident with what is necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	 ### Chapter XVIII
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	 ### Of the Fracture of the Pelvis of a Woman and the Bones of the Penis and Testicles of a Man
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	 ### When the woman's pelvis is broken, then make her sit in a chair that has been lowered, and next incline her a little to one side of her back, and let someone hold her from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	 ### Then the midwife should fill the pelvis with cotton, and it should be done in her pelvis like this; and then the woman should be shaken, and her back should be raised little by little, because all of this is forgotten until the broken bone returns to its place as shown and the fracture heals. 》
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	 ### Then place poultices on her back, and when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton with ease, and then she should urinate; after that, replace it and return to the manner in which you placed it at the beginning, and then return to her first pillow.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	 ### And do this for seven days or thereabouts, because by then it will be healed.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	 And if you wish, take a bladder of a sheep and strongly insert through the patient's anus a reed cannula; and interpose the entire bladder into his vagina, and then blow into the cannula with all your strength until the bladder is inflated within the vagina, for the fracture will return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	 Then it should be filled with cotton and remain in place for several days as we have recommended, until the patient is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	 And when the bone of a man's or woman's thigh is broken, then administer to his restoration and mending what we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	 And what is correct is not hidden in these nearby fractures and which happen rarely, especially to one who has some learning and experience and understands this book of mine; for that fracture signifies to you the greatest dispositions in the right way towards his restoration and stricture, so understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	 But in the man's penis when it is broken, take an onion and put the penis inside it; then place over him a wrapping of cloth, and have it wrapped, and then let it rest for three days or around that time, and he will be cured.
Capitol .xix.	 It seems like you are ready for more translation practice! However, as a text-based AI model, I'm unable to directly access external content or texts that you might be referring to. If you provide the specific medieval medical treatise text here, I can certainly help you translate it line by line into English.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	 Certainly! Let's translate this line by line:
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	 Based on the provided example and the similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	 And if the wound is bleeding, then it is necessary for you to apply pressure to stop the bleeding, sprinkling powdered zedoary root over the wound if there is no other pressing matter at hand.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	 And then proceed to set the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this, lest an abscess forms.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	 But if an abscess occurs, then you should postpone the setting of the fracture until the ninth day, so that the abscess may subside, and do not approach it on the third day or the fourth day altogether, for you will cause bad accidents to happen.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	 But if the broken bone is prominent and exposed, then it is necessary for you to carefully reduce it and smooth it with your hands using gentle pressure and minimal force.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	 But if the extension and alignment of the bone cannot be achieved with your hands, then you should reduce it using this instrument; and the instrument is made of iron, with a length of seven or eight fingers, and its width depends on the size of the wound. And therefore, it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of these instruments depending on what is needed in the care of all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	 "And if it is redundant, and there is little flesh in that area so that it does not become bent, you should place the compress over that area during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	 "And if there is an acute extremity which has margins on its extremities, and is more swollen above than below, and in the middle it separates into parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "And this is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	 "And it is called in Greek 'the willful hand', which means a small shovel.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	 "Because the sharp extremity should be placed with its pointed end raised above the prominent bone's extremity.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	 "And you should push that (sharp extremity) once until it reaches the bone and is surrounded by some swelling.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	 "And therefore you must surround the fracture's extremities between them, and if the broken extremity is thin, and does not properly hold the instrument, then it is necessary for you to introduce the bone's extremity until the instrument has sufficient purchase.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	 "But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have mentioned, then introduce it with what is appropriate to the trephines which we have spoken of; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	 And then scrape away what remains on the bones of roughness and small sharp pieces.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	 And when the bone is reduced, and then if the patient finds a very intense pain, you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and in this case, do what you think will greatly benefit the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	 After you have completed the restoration of the bone, then dip a cloth in black stiptic wine, especially if it is summer, and do not place wax or any other substance that contains oil on the wound, so that it does not cause inflammation and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	 Then administer steel shavings at the time of completion of the bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can cut out the cloth with scissors and use dressings according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	 And be very careful not to strain the wound with the fracture, for many foolish doctors have done this and caused death or severe illness on their patients, which is unfortunate.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	 And if there is a slight tightness, loosen it, different from the tightness of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	 And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear that bad things could happen to it, as we have discussed, and you find pain in that area, then do not put bandages on it, but rather make an envelope of hard cloths instead of bandages and strengthen it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	 And when, after one or two days, the wound has started to form pus, then remove the cloth that you had placed on it with vinegar, and then apply plasters, ointments which we are accustomed to use for treating wounds, such as tetrapharmacon ointment and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	 And see to it that you loosen the bandage and examine the wound each day in the morning and evening until it is healed and firmly closed, and it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that the pus flows from it to the neighboring parts easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	 If many days have passed and the wound is neither healed nor the pus has been expelled, then know that there are maggots inside it, for which reason you must probe the wound with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	 And of those maggots, those that are separate and protruding, remove and extract them; those that are not separated and afflict the member and cause pain, perforate and cut them as is possible for you to do so.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	 And if the wound becomes infected or ulcerated, and it is an abscess, or another type of corruption and putrefaction, then you must apply to each one of these [infections] the water that is suitable for it, according to the preceding narrative in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	 And concerning the water in which you should place your remedy and you should present your powder: when the bone is broken, protrude it over the member like the bones of the pelvis and ribs, similar to those of the large members; and do not attempt to attract it or extract it, because many times this causes death. Leave it alone until it can heal on its own, for within a few days or even thirty, it will fall back into place by itself; then treat the wound if you know how, otherwise leave it.
Capitol .xx.	 Chapter .20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	 On the treatment of nodes that occur due to a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	 It often happens that this node occurs in the trace of a fracture, and it is particularly common near the joints, as it takes on the shape of the member; and very easily it prevents the member from its natural function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	 And allow the extraction to not be loosened for several days; and then loosen it and replace another one, until the swelling is reduced; or press firmly on that lead plate, because lead has the property of removing all inflammation in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 But if the swelling has already turned to stone and is tight and requires removal immediately, then split it through its highest part, and cut away the excess and protruding parts, or scrape it with sharp instruments until the swelling is reduced; and treat that area until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	 Chapter 21: On the restoration of a fracture, when it has been restored and the limb is still weak and frail, not according to its natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	 When a bone fracture has been restored, and the limb still remains weak and frail, this is not due to a single cause but rather to multiple causes: one of which is excessive loosening or tightening of the bandages that was not done as needed; or due to excess tightness of the bandages until the nourishment cannot reach the limb; or due to excessive superfluous wrapping; or due to unnecessary movement at the wrong time; or due to lack of blood in the patient's body and their overall weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	 Based on the given text, here's my attempt to translate and interpret the provided sentence:
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	 And then place the hand on the member, so that the hand draws to it a little nourishment, or continuous irrigation with warm water, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	 About the treatment of broken bones when they are misaligned and the operation is forbidden because it is harmful.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	 When the member that has been restored begins to heal from misalignment and protrusion of the broken bone and knot, and it is because of the swelling of the member's shape, however, the member is not forbidden its natural operation. Therefore, you should not accept the word of someone who believes that member is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	 However, there have been foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is very contemptible, leading to great fear, the sign of which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	 But if the limping and knotting are recent, then it is necessary to irrigate them with warm water in which softening herbs have been cooked, such as leaves of mallow and roots of marshmallow, and melilot, and similar ones; and a plaster should be made with a softening plaster, such as well-made gum tragacanth; or take the mucilage of marshmallow root and mix it with egg white or oil of almonds, and plaster with that; or take fat figs and crush them with pigeon droppings, and similar ones from the medicines that are called amerments for consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	 And sometimes it is dissolved with persistent light friction using moist hands, while also administering movement of the limb in all directions at all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	 But if the curvature has already advanced and is firmly established, becoming calcified and requiring treatment with a needle, then it must be carefully perforated, and the continuity of the bone must be dissolved. The superfluous material caused by this condition should be cut away with fine scissors, and ease should be administered to the patient with due care and diligence.
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter .xxiii.
De sermo en dislocacio.	 On speech and dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	 Dislocation is the displacement of any of the joints from their proper position, preventing movement and distorting the figure of the limb, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	 Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to immediately puncture and reduce it, without delaying the reduction; for if it is delayed, the site becomes swollen and difficult to reduce, making the treatment of the dislocation very difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	 And for this reason, it is not advisable to move or extend the limb during the swelling, as excessive movement causes cramps and intense pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	 When this happens, it is necessary for you to resort to the phlebotomy of the patient, and immediately let out some blood so that the abscess can rest; then wrap the affected member in warm water and oil, and then reduce it with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	 And let every member be treated with the same water from which the memory will return to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	 And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation following the same order as in fracture, from the highest part of the body to the lowest.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	 Of the treatment for dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	 When both jaws are dislocated at the same time; and this dislocation occurs in two ways: either they are slightly removed from their places and somewhat softened, or they are completely dislocated until they are softened at the joint, to the point that saliva flows from the patient's mouth and he cannot hold it or close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his word.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	 But when the dislocation is minor, it usually returns to its place on its own with little effort.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	 "However, if the dislocation is complete and total, then a gentle reduction should be administered immediately, without delaying at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 "And the assistant should hold the head of the patient, while the doctor inserts his thumb into the dislocated jaw from one side with one hand, or both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers should be placed outside, gripping; and command the patient to cease moving their jaws and let them return to their proper place; and the doctor should grip the jaw and push it back until it returns to its original position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	 "And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer fumigation with hot water and oil until a gentle reduction of both is achieved, without delaying the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	 "And when they return and are gripped, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then place powdered cloth with wax over them, made of wax and rose oil; and then bind it gently with soft bandages.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	 And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows, so that they do not move to the right or the left; and do not force them to chew anything; let their food be softened lion [meat], until the pains have subsided and the jaws are loosened, then let them eat whatever they want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	 And let this be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth during eating, drinking, or speaking until the jaw is loosened and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	 And if it is difficult to reduce the two jaws when they are dislocated and have not returned to their proper place, then frequent fevers and cold water occur, and very easily raise the stomach of the patient, and very easily cause pure vomiting.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	 And when you see this, then know that it is fatal; and most often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter XXV
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	 Of the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the tip of the shoulder muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	 The collarbone is not dislocated from within by its connection with the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated to the outside, and this is evident to touch.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	 "And the healing of him is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	 "Then quickly close the area with your palm firmly, because it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	 "Then place on it a plaster and bandages, and bind it tightly.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	 "But if the extremity that is the elbow and its continuation are not dislocated at all, then it should be reduced and splinted as we have said and as seems best to you.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	 "Then place on it a plaster, bandages, and tight wrapping, and instruct the patient to maintain peace and rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	 "And with this same treatment, the tendon is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	 "Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	 "On the reduction of the dislocation of the tendon.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	 "Know that the tendon is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated from the tip to below.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	 "The second is that it is dislocated above the tendon, and this happens later; and it is not dislocated behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front of the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	 Based on the given context and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	 And when it happens that a blow or fall occurs to some men, and their muscles swell with an acute hematoma, it is thought that it may already be dislocated by this.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	 Therefore, you should proceed with what is necessary to prepare yourself for his care, and then begin the treatment of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	 And it is known that the dislocation of him occurs when he has pain in the joints; you should tickle them, so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you will find a clear difference between them; you will find concavity at the end of the muscle, and by tickling it, you should touch the head of the muscle like an egg, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to their ear, nor move it in any way.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	 If it is dislocated, you should tickle the feet or ankles, and then you will find clear contact, which is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	 And in this case of slight dislocation, when it is recent and the patient is a child, a light reduction is made.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	 The reduction of it is that the attendant lifts the patient's hand to the joint above; and then places their fingers below the ticklish part of the patient, and raises the joint strongly upwards to its place, and the attendant lifts the patient's hand, and extends it out; and then places it down because it returns slightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	 If the above treatment does not work and the dislocation persists from its initial onset for several days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water, and an embrocation that softens and loosens should be applied, such as a decoction of altea, fenugreek, and melilot in water. This should also be administered to the patient.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	 Then have the patient lie face down on their stomach and place a small cushion under their hips to provide support between lightness and firmness. The physician should then place their heel on the cushion, lift the patient's head with all their strength, pull the patient's hand backwards so that it is not drawn towards the lower parts, and another assistant should hold the patient's head so that it is not drawn towards the lower parts. For this treatment often brings the dislocation back to its proper place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	 And if you wish to perform the treatment in another way: you should have present a man who is taller than the patient, standing on the side of the affected limb. He should insert his thigh under the patient's hips and lift them upwards until the patient is suspended in the air. Another assistant should pull the patient's hand away from their stomach.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	 If the patient is light (in weight), then it's necessary that someone else hold them, in order to cause gravity for the patient, because the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 And it is reduced in another way: which is to place a long stick on the ground with its head round like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and then the patient is placed underneath; after that, cloths are placed over the head of the stick, and the patient stands according to the length of the stick, and then one hand is extended towards the other side of the body; and the body is extended strongly on the other side, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	 And if the reduction is difficult due to all the reasons mentioned above, then use this treatment: and that is, you take a stick whose length is two arms long, and its width is four fingers wide, and its thickness is reduced at both ends like this:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	 And then round cloths are tied over the top so that the stick does not injure the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	 And then the patient is placed underneath the lower end of the stick, and their hand or arm is extended over the stick towards the other side, and the stick is tied around the thighs, the arms, and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	 "Next, place the arms on a step of the ladder according to their length, and let the hands hang freely on the sides, while the other part remains suspended, because the joint is about to enter.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	 "And when the treatment of him is completed according to any method that is possible for you, then it is necessary to place underneath the splint a moderate amount of wool; and next apply a plaster prepared from powdered resin with vinegar and egg white over all the muscles, so that it wraps around. And then bind the splint tightly underneath, and the bandage should be wrapped over the plaster, and his hand should be attached to his neck, and he should be left alone, and his hand should not be moved for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	 "And it is necessary that the patient's food be scarce until the member is comforted, because it is easier for him to heal.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	 "And then the food should be given more abundantly after seven or five days and some exercise should be performed; and if it is fixed and not softened, then he is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	 "However, if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that happens to him or for another reason, then it is necessary to administer a cautery with three holes in that area, as was said before in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	 Here's the translation of your provided sentence:
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	 From the dislocation of that which is done to the feet and the breasts or the separated parts behind, the reduction is done with pressure and extension by the hands until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And another stricture should be administered to that area, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	 And if it happens that the heaviness in the limb and the tardiness of its movement persist, then the patient should use warm baths until that heaviness is relieved and returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	 On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	 Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and likewise returns with difficulty; and it can be dislocated in all directions, most commonly in front of or behind the shoulder blade. The dislocation of this joint is not hidden from you because it falls below the socket or touches another part according to which figure it is dislocated. And when you set the dislocated shoulder with the hand, it is clearly manifested to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	 And it is necessary to cut and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it reaches the critical stage, because if it reaches that stage, the reduction becomes difficult, and a long time does not heal completely; especially when it is in the posterior direction, for of all other species of dislocation it is the worst, and most painful, and many heated things often bring death with them.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	 And the restoration of him, when it is possible to reduce (the dislocation), is that his hand be extended with two hands, and his arms be spread out, and the hands of the doctor be on the elbows underneath him, and he should push the joint with the thumbs of his hands together, or with the edge of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	 But if the dislocation is in the forward direction, then return it so that you bend his hand with your hand until you strike the elbow with the edge of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	 And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer a strong extension and powerful motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	 And it is that two assistants should extend the arm, and hold it firmly with two hands so that it is not moved away from the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	 And then turn the arm towards every direction, because it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around his hand or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	 And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this helps in the lubrication of the joint with ease; and then push the joint with strong pressure until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	 And for the reduction of this, it is necessary to place something over that paste in which there is astringency and dryness with egg white, and it should be drawn out with a tight bandage, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	 And then it should be released; and if the joint is formed in its place, then release the bandage from the patient and leave it like that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	 And if you see that the joint is not strengthened, then reapply the paste and the bandage, and leave it like that for several days until it is healed; and then release it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	 But if there is gravity near the reduction of the joint, and the patient's condition is agitated, then apply moistening with a bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or place a light cushion on the joint, if it is a large-scale movement; and then bind it, and leave it on the bones day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	 And then remove that, and put him in a bath; and when he comes out, then rub the joint with warm friction, and then reapply on top of that cushion, if it is round-shaped movement, once, and a second time, and a third time,
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	 "In the process of bathing, until it is clean.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	 "And if you want, place a wet and shaved cow's bladder on the affected area with a border or linen cloth on top; do this several times, because it is moist and returns to its proper state.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	 "Chapter 28: Treatment for shoulder dislocation, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	 "Shoulder dislocation in the hand can sometimes be dislocated, and reducing the dislocation is easy, unlike other joints. However, it is important to act quickly in reducing it within the hour of its dislocation, before the area swells or an abscess forms.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 "The reduction of the dislocation is done by placing the patient's hand joint on a table and having them extend their hand. The doctor then places their hand or palm over the top of the joint and pushes it until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	 "However, it is important to consider if the palm has already separated from the hand. In that case, let the patient place the back of their hand on a table with extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is in front of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be face down on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls on that prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	 And therefore, if it returns quickly, it is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a cedar plaster to draw out the abscess and leave it alone; and do not repeat this, because otherwise you will not be able to bear or endure the reduction of the pus that passes to him each day.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	 However, the joint remains according to its tortuosity; and do not tell the patient any reason, but rather that your hand is softened and cannot strengthen anything; then you should know that the nerves are pinched or twisted, and in this case, it will not be beneficial unless it is strengthened with a pointed cautery near the affected area, and thus you will confer some benefit.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	 Therefore, once the illness has returned, place upon it the plaster which we have mentioned, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; and afterward, unbind it and let it be left alone, and exercise the patient's hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	 But if the patient's movement is hindered and some serious condition occurs, then apply warmth to that area with hot water and some friction several times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	 On the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	 "Sometimes these [joints/bones] are dislocated in all directions.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	 When a finger is dislocated to the back of the palm or the front of it, then hold the finger and use your thumbs to push the dislocation until it returns to its original position.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	 Then support the head of the finger, and suspend the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	 Then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened in its own time that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	 And when it is night, bind it according to that account, and do not cease to unbind it during the day and exercise with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for a few days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	 And do the same with this, if it is dislocated to the front of the hand, and bind it to that part and perform the first operation with the thumb until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	 Similarly, do this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	 Chapter XXX
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	 Of the treatment for the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	 When it happens to someone that the vertebrae of the back or neck are completely dislocated and many vertebrae have been removed from their places, then there is no cure for that, because death overtakes the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	 And the sign of this is that the evacuation of the patient is expelled without will and cannot be retained; and many times some members are weakened, such as both thighs or both arms or one of those; or a vertebra has been moved from its place, because many times it is moved and many times the removal of those is done to four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	 Therefore, that [vertebra] has already been moved to the posterior regions and is named lordosis.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	 However, the cure for this is that one should consider if lordosis occurs in childhood, because then there is no cure for it, nor is there complete healing of that.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	 But for those that come about due to injury or blow or similar causes, the ancients have spoken of various manners of cure with lengthy discourse, from which the greatest benefit is derived; but I have abbreviated this, so as not to bore you with too much of it, in accordance with my own understanding. With this method, I have expounded and shaped it using diverse instruments, by means of which I will show this and explain it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	 And I say that in lordosis that occurs in the anterior region of the feet, there is neither healing nor cure for it; and similarly for those that are made to two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	 And of those (pains), only that which occurs in the back is cured with what I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	 And have the patient lie on their back, near a wall, and place a wet cloth underneath them to prevent their feet from being lifted.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	 And place a straight stick in the ground at the head of the patient, near their face, and another stick at their feet on the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	 And one assistant should hold the stick and not fix it in a hole; another assistant should hold the other (stick) in the same manner.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 And then wrap the bandage around the patient's head and under their chin, extend the end of the bandage to the stick near their head and tie it there; and then place another bandage on their thighs, between their legs, over their knees and ankles; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick at their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	 And then each assistant should extend the bandage to the base of the stick, and do not move the two sticks or the bandages from their positions where they are placed, but rather keep them loose as we said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	 And the physician places their palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or places something on top of it, and then adjusts their feet on the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	 But if it does not return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is approximately three arms' lengths, and make a hole in the wall near the patient so that the end of the table can fit into it.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	 And then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the physician places their feet on the other end of the table and pulls hard until the spine is narrowed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	 And if you wish, turn the one that is rolled with the hand; and it should be such that you place the patient's head at the end of two stakes, the length of which should be an arm's length, and place their head in the same way on two stakes; and let there be a palm's width between each stake. And then each stake has been drilled with a hole through which a rope can run, and each stake is firmly secured to the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	 And there should be another round stake through which the rope runs, and it should be wound around the two holes of the two stakes.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	 And at the end of it is a hole in which a stick is inserted, and its length is one palm high and wrapped around; and in the other two sticks, it is similar to this.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 Then strengthen the bindings that you have tightened in the patient's feet around the hole that is nearest to their head, and the bindings that you have tightened on their thighs around the turn nearest to their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	 Then there should be a minister at each turn who turns the turn with his hand, and the doctor aligns the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	 And this is the shape of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	 Then after the spine has been returned and the place has been aligned, it is necessary to put an exfoliating plaster made with egg white and then wool; and then place on the plaster a wooden board whose width is three fingers or around that, and whose length is such that it covers the swollen area, and above the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	 Then it should be bound with the binding we mentioned earlier, and the patient should be fed with light food until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	 And if there is any sign of swelling in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medications that soften and cleanse with the administration of the recommended table for a long time; and a lead plate has already been applied to that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	 Based on the given text and context, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter 31
De curacio de anca dislocada.	 On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	 Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should only be dislocated, and not treated with what is done to other joints for minor displacement or concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	 And the hip joint can be dislocated in four ways: either into the interior parts, or into the exterior parts, or into the anterior parts, or into the posterior parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	 And it is most commonly dislocated inward, and rarely in front or behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	 And the sign of its dislocation inward is that when you straighten the patient's healthy leg and compare it with the sick one, the sick one is longer and the knee protrudes more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his leg at the knee, and the area where the swelling appears is hot, because the head of the thigh bone has already arrived here. ️
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	 And the sign for that which has been dislocated outward is that its conditions are opposite to those just mentioned.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	 And the sign for that which has been dislocated forward is that it extends its thigh according to its nature, but nevertheless cannot bend without pain in the knee, and if it tries to walk, it cannot move toward the front; and its urine is retained, and its groin is swollen, and it walks on its heel. ️
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	 This text appears to be a description of the signs and symptoms of a dislocation in the hip or pelvic region. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	 Certainly! Let's translate the sentence step by step:
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	 Here's my attempt to translate the text into English:
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	 And if the extension of it or the separation inside is from the armpit to the collarbone, or from behind to the back.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	 And if the extension of all these happens at once, until the patient is raised from the ground and remains suspended.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	 And this type of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	 Therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, then all kinds of treatment for the proper cure are necessary.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	 In the reduction of itself, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the internal parts, it is necessary that the patient be placed supine on his back; and then place the ligaments over the shoulder bone in that place which is between the head of the shoulder and the place below the armpit; and then extend the ligament from above the part of the armpit to the highest part of the collarbone.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	 Then another strong assistant should take the arms of the patient and firmly grasp the large part of the diseased shoulder, and extend it to the external parts with great force, for that returns it to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	 And this type is a lighter cure with which this member is reduced than the other types.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	 Based on the context and the language used in the previous lines, here's a possible translation for this sentence:
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	 And let the length of each be by the quantity of four fingers, and let the leg of the patient be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	 And have the patient be suspended over the top of the post, and let them be in the highest position; and let the length from their feet to the ground be two arm lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 And then command a strong young man to pull the head of the bed, and let another young man be suspended with the patient, and the other young man pulls the bed strongly with force, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	 But in the proper reduction, when it is a dislocation at the exit point, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back as we have recommended in having them kneel; and let the ligament be strengthened properly on the affected leg and on their feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	 And then two posts should be placed, one under their feet and the other under their head; and then posts should be placed in the middle of the bed covered with damp cloths, so that the patient is not harmed by the post being between their thighs, for you need the extension at the exit points not to be impeded.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	 And then each assistant should extend towards their respective side, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	 Therefore, if there is a reversal, it will be very good; and if not, press firmly on that area and proceed as we have said in gentleness for the same guidance.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	 But make sure the patient lies on their back quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	 And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary that the thigh be slightly extended, and according to this same narrative, [it should be] on a pillow; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patient's knee, and then presses that with the other hand, and with that pressure, he extends [the leg] towards the back part at the back of the thigh.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	 And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended towards the back, and he should be raised off the ground; however, it is necessary that he be placed on a hard surface, just as we have said about the elevation if his ankle is dislocated outward, as we have described the positioning of him on two ankles; and it is with his face down and the limbs extended, as we have said, there is nothing more.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	 And it is necessary that a compression with a board be applied onto the location where the joint is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	 So, when the reduction is complete according to what is necessary — and you see the sign of the reduction in him, which is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those joints and the patient extends his leg and expands it without excuse, then know that the member has returned as is necessary. Then place two cushions and apply a poultice, and bind tightly so that the swelling is not increased in any part; and let the patient rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	 Then remove the bandage and the poultice, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	 At that point, if you see those joints in order, then know that the dislocation is now healed, and then allow the patient to go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	 And if you see any sign of softening, then return and apply a plaster to that area, and extend it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	 Then remove that plaster, and make the patient walk with support on each side for several days, until he is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Capítulo XXXII. (Chapter 32)
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	 About the care for dislocation of the elbow.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	 The elbow is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the sides outward, and to the sides inward, and more often to the sides behind; but it cannot be dislocated to the front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	 And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their thigh with the knee; then you know that the elbow is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	 And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the patient sit upright, so that they extend their leg, if possible over it; attach your thumb to the face of it, and place the patient's foot between your feet; then make the elbow adhere to your palms, and hold them firmly on the elbow with your thumbs, and another assistant extends his foot until the elbow returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	 And the sign of reduction is that the thigh adheres to the knee with effortless ease.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 Then bandage it and make the thigh adhere to the knee, then bind both together at once with a band for three or four days, and then unbind them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	 And do not use the patient for walking for some days, until they are healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	 But if the reduction of him to you is excused, then administer strong extension with bandages as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter .xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	 Of the treatment for ankle dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	 The ankle is sometimes displaced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the degree, and its dislocation occurs either inside or outside the joints.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	 And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle swell in the direction to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	 But the treatment for its slight displacement is easy reduction, which is to extend it gently with the hands and wrap it until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	 But in the treatment of it when it is dislocated to a greater degree, you must make the patient lie down straight, and he should have a strong and capable assistant behind him in the middle of his back.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	 And then with your right hand take the foot from the upper part, and with your left hand from the lower part of the foot near the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	 And now pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with the left for two times, and then extend with the left; and press the foot of the leg with the right above the thigh without effort.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	 And do this twice as we have agreed.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	 And then press the foot of the leg to the thigh for the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	 Therefore, if it returns in one time or two according to this manner, and you see the foot swollen, it is good; but if not, then repeat the operation on him, for that returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	 But if it is forbidden for you to reduce him with this that we have recommended, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and firmly tie a bandage on the ground, and let it go between his thighs, and you have already wrapped a cloth over him so that the patient does not become cold.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	 And then the assistant should hold his thighs, and another assistant should extend the foot with their hands or with a band that lies on the knee of the foot; and then each assistant should extend against the extension of his partner, and let the band be stretched between the patient's thighs, holding it so that the body is not pulled towards the ends beyond its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	 And then the doctor reduces the dislocation with his hands, and another attendant holds the healthy joint at the edges, because the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	 And once the dislocation has returned and you have ascertained the health of the reduction, then place a poultice and tightly bind it with strong bandages, and bind the foot to the leg with a bandage.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	 And beware or take care of the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage on it is not harsh and does not press too strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	 And then leave it for two days or three; and if the bandage has softened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	 And then unbind it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	 But if the patient insists on walking before that time, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it may not receive healing.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	 And if an abscess forms, then you should administer to the patient that which was mentioned earlier in our treatise, in another section on treatment and application, until it is removed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	 **Chapter XXXIV.**
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	 **On the treatment of dislocation of the toes.**
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	 **It is advised that the one who is dislocated should be wrapped with a bandage of moderate length without difficulty; this task is not difficult but rather easy.**
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	 **However, if the dislocation is in some of the toes at the back of the foot, then you should have the patient sit on a hard surface such as the ground or a table, and be in this position as if they were walking.**
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	 **Then you should stand on the patient's foot and place your own foot over what seems to be the joint, then press with your foot with all your strength until it returns to its original position, and you will see that it is wrapped and does not protrude.**
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	 **Then place under the sole of their foot a board that covers the entire foot, which has two handles; then strengthen it with moderate and firm bandages for three days; then loosen them and have the patient rest from walking for many days until it is strengthened and healing is assured.**
Capitol .xxxv.	 **Chapter XXXV.**
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	 **On the types of dislocation that occur with injury, or with fracture, or with both together.**
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	 When some cause of this occurs and you engage in the treatment of it and in its restoration, many times death follows.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	 And for this reason, one should not presume over the treatment of it except someone who is wise in the art, with long practice, merciful and pious, patient, not rash or presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning medicines that cauterize only slightly, and leaves the sick person to divine judgment, unless there is hope for him to be saved from perdition, with some relief from the illness, and in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	 And then strive immediately to bring about a reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes cauterized by an abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	 And then if the member returns as we wish, administer a remedy that cauterizes the abscess and treats the wound with what is convenient among the desiccating ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	 And if there is dislocation with fracture and the bones are separated into pieces, then you should first reduce them, and do in this what we have said before in simple illnesses of this kind.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	 And protect and avoid according to your virtue that which comes from within through the ways of fear as preceded by my prediction; for this is better for you, you should honor your Creator, and it will be more lasting for your glory, and more beneficial for your true body in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	 Thus ends the words of Albucasis, may God be praised.
Amen.	 Indeed.
