Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	 Here begins the treatise of Al-Bucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	 Oh, my sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, its completion has been achieved in it and through its expositions and clarifications, it seems to me that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is a part of the operations by hand, which is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	 For the operation by hand is neglected in our region and in our time, to such an extent that its science has nearly perished, and its traces have been effaced; nothing remains of it except a few brief descriptions in the books of the ancients, which they altered most and thus fell into error and confusion, until their meanings were closed off and its force and art were prolonged.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	 And it is clear to me that I should revive this [science] with the ordering of this treatise in accordance with the way of exposition and clarification and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of the cautery tools and the other instruments of the work as they are necessary for the addition of clarification, and for its preparation.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	 However, the reason why a good craftsman with his hands cannot be found in this our time is that the art of medicine is long, and its practitioner must first be trained in the science of anatomy, which includes knowing the joints of the members and their forms, and the connections and separations of them; and having knowledge of the bones, nerves, and sinews, as well as their number and placement; and of the pulsating veins and those at rest, and the places from which they emerge.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	 And for this reason, Hippocrates says that a name is nothing, but in the work, it is small, and mostly in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	 But we have already spoken of that in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy will be unable to avoid falling into error, which will cause the death of men, as I have seen happen many times, because some are trained in this science and yet reject it without knowledge or experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	 Because I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor cut an erysipelatous abscess on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed until the woman died in his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	 And I saw another doctor who tried to remove a stone from a man who had it in his bladder, and the stone was large, and he came upon it and drew out that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that on the third day the man died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	 And I was already called to remove that stone, and when I saw the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I realized that he would die under my care.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	 Certainly! Here is the translation of your provided text:
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	 And then loosen him according to his desires, and then bind him again, and then let him lie still for some days, and command that we unbind the bandage; and thus it went on until the space and the foot were infected, and reached destruction.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	 And I was called to him, and prepared to unbind the bandage, and thus he found peace and so his pains decreased.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	 However, corruption was already established in the member, so it could not be stopped, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the member until the patient perished.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	 And I saw another doctor who punctured a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after some days, until the evil of it was greatly increased with its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	 The cause of which is because the cancerous abscess is full of melancholic humor, so it is not good that iron should come to it from all directions, but rather that there should be a member where it can be hosted.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	 And therefore, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two directions: this is, in an operation associated with health, and in work which involves great risk in the most important conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	 And I have already explained this in every part of this book where an operation takes place that involves error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against this and leave it, so that the pages do not find a way to speak and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	 Therefore, take up your arms with diligence and under the protection of God, and tend to your patients with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	 And use the best method by the grace of God to achieve healing and praiseworthy success, and leave behind terrible diseases that are difficult to cure. Set aside your arms from what makes you fearful, so that doubt in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for it is more glorious for you, and all the more so in this world and forever after for your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	 Galen has already discussed this in certain of his treatises:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	 "Do not practice bad medicine, lest you be called bad doctors.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	 And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	 Begin the division of the book, and first of all the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	 The first chapter is ordered about the head and feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the irons of the cauteries, and on what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	 The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The second chapter, on incision and puncture, and on cupping glasses, and on ulcers, and on the extraction of arrows and similar things, all of which is arranged according to the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	 Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The third chapter, on reduction and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar things; a chapter arranged from head to toe, and according to the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	 On cautery with fire and sharp medicine, and on the memory of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	 With this begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	 I will tell you about the qualities of the instruments for that cautery and their disadvantages, and in what circumstances it is forbidden to use cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	 Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery instrument and its disadvantages is long and complex, subtle in knowledge, and secretly hidden; many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, and for me, only a small part of their discussions is enough, lest my speech become too long.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	 And so I say that you can perform cautery on any condition, whether it has matter or not, except for two conditions, which are cold conditions without matter. ething
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	 And one who says the contrary of this, that through cauterization, improvement is immediately made in every dry and cold disease that appears in men's bodies; for when you compare a man's body and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find the man's body cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	 And I say by the word of that one, that I have already experienced this many times myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	 However, it is not fitting that this should be done by someone who has already been proven and practiced in the chapter of cautery through recent exercise, and who has known the diversity of man's constitution and the disposition of illnesses within them, as well as the causes of those illnesses and their accidents, and the duration of time for each.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	 But in other constitutions, there is no need to fear this, and especially in cold and moist illnesses; for all doctors have agreed upon these, and they are not disagreed upon in the improvement with cautery in them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	 And know, sons, that of the secret of healing by cautery with fire and its goodness, it is said that there is cautery with medicine that burns; this is because fire is simple, and its action only reaches the member that is cauterized, and does not harm the other members associated with it except for a small injury.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	 "However, the action of medicine reaches that part of the body which is distant from the affected member, and it quickly brings about difficult healing in the afflicted member and causes a swift remedy.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	 "However, fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does nothing but flow out. It is already known to us through experience and long study in this art about the truth of causes; and for that reason I am excused from the length of the discourse. And if it were not that it is not read in my book, I would here reveal to you a secret hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in the body and its expulsion by which it expels diseases, demonstrated with philosophical speech, which would sharpen your intellects.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	 "And know, my sons, that they differ in opinion about the time when it is best to perform cautery and consider the best time to be spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	 "And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm caused by the accidental time is submerged in the benefit obtained from cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pain or necessary pains, strong and persistent, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that greater evil will come, which is more than a small harm due to the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	 And this is not what you should think in your minds, o children, for only the common people and foolish doctors think so. This is because for that illness which can be cured by cautery, there is always a chance of relapse, and they stop at that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	 And the cause is not as they think because of this: cautery is used only in places where medicine alters the complexion and dries up the humidities which are the cause of the pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	 But nevertheless, cautery is superior to medicine in terms of its strength and the power of its action and the greatness of its lordship.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	 And it is possible that his illness may return at some point in time, depending on the complexion of the patient and the location of his illness, and his strength, and what has been prepared in his body from the accumulation of excesses within him, and what he has acquired in his diet and similar causes; unless the illness for which cautery is administered is a subtle illness with few excesses and humidities, such as cautery of a tooth for pain and the like, it is possible that the pain will not return to him. But this is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	 And it is commonly said that cautery is the last resort in medicine, and this is a true statement because I understand in it that they believe it is not a cure that benefits with medicine or any other cause except for cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	 And the reason is contrary to this; and the intention that cautery is the last resort in medicine is only when administering methods of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and then at the end of the cause one administers cautery, and it benefits for that purpose.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	 And from here it is clear that cautery is the last resort in medicine, not according to the intention which I understand from the common people and too many foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	 And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this only because of the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	 And they said that the place of cautery does not cause scarring, as if this were absolutely true, for I have already proved and found that this is not so except in some bodies without others, and cauterizing with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; but nevertheless when you make a cautery with fire and gold, it is not specified to you, for it is ignited according to the quantity you want by the rust of the gold, and because it prepares to receive cold; and if you place a fire on top of it, the gold melts from the heat, and some thin sheets fall into the fire due to the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	 And for this, a cautery with iron should be made less heavily and more delicately in accordance with the operation's requirements.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	 And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to the chapters, and I have arranged those from head to toe, so that the inquirer may choose what he wants.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	 Of cautery for head pain due to cold and dampness.
Le capitol primier.	 The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	 This cauterization removes cold and dampness from the body, which are two causes of many accidents; it is the cause of sweat and excessive flow of rheumatic humors, known as "corissa," flowing from the head to the parts around the eyes and ears, sleepiness, toothache and sore throat, and generally all illnesses caused by coldness, such as paralysis, sweating, apoplexy, and similar conditions in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	 The manner of this cauterization is as follows: firstly, instruct the patient to be purged with a purgative medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	 And then instruct them to shave their head with a razor, and then make that person sit between your hands on a low bench, and have them place their hands on their feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	 And then place the edge of your palm near the foot on the edge of the nose between its nostrils.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	 But when your hand reaches the middle of the foot, mark that spot with a stylus, and then heat the olive-shaped cautery of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	 And then place that [cautery] on the marked spot, in such a way that it descends, with which you should slowly tighten your hand, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	 And then lightly lift your hand and look at the spot, and if you see any part of the bone's head revealed, even as small as a grain of barley, then lift your hand. But if not, return your hand with that iron, or with another one like it, until you see what I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	 And then take a little salt and dissolve it in water over the spot and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	 And then place on him a cloth soaked in vinegar and let it stay on him until the scab of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat the spot with a four-ingredient ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	 And they have said that as long as the wound remains open, it is better for the arm, because it is more beneficial and healing.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	 And they said that the tendon should be cauterized inside the bone, and that the cautery should be kept there until some part of the bone’s appearance is altered.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	 And then it should be scraped off whatever is attached to the bone, and then it should be treated.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	 And others said that with the cautery one should reach to the end, until it strongly presses into the bone, until the bone breaks, and this is the form of small incision.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	 And they believe that from that place, the vapors of the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	 And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is healed.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	 But I have not seen these two types of cautery in all cases, only in some men according to the way of fear; and leave that aside, tell me, is it better with health, when it exists; because the head is opened by a break in its continuity as we have shown in the other members, especially when the patient's head is of frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	 And the first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; and with that kind and with that work, one heals.
Capitol segon.	 Chapter two.
Del cauteri del cap.	 Of cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	 When the entire head experiences chronic and prolonged pain in the patient, and various remedies such as hellebore, cupping, bloodletting, plasters, baths, cups, poultices, and similar treatments have been used, especially if cautery has already been performed with a cauterizing tool that fails to provide any benefit from these causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution by nature; if it is not weak but rather very cold, then cauterize again with another cautery a little below that one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	 Then cauterize that area on the crown of the head with a cautery until the scalp is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	 After the scalp is cut and the bone is exposed to the extent we have mentioned, cauterize that area with a cautery in the back part of the head in the place called "vas,"—and this is the place where a cupping glass is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	 And be careful in this matter, and do not expose the bone, for the patient finds very great pain from this, different from the pain of all other head cauteries.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	 I say this about the cautery in its place, for the cautery with which the crowns of the head and the occiput are cauterized should be finer than that with which the middle of the head is cauterized; and this is how it should be done.
Capitol ters.	 "Chapter three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	 "About the recent cautery for migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	 "When the pain in the head is severe or spreads to the eye, it should be evacuated with purgative medicines, and the other treatment that I have mentioned in the diseases of the head should be administered; if this does not help, then cauterization can be done in two ways: either with a sharp-burning medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	 "But cauterization with a burning medicine is that you take an aloe leaf, clean it and bind the ends of it from both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	 "Then you should make an incision in the place of pain in the temple with a loaded lancet, so that it is well-placed under the skin, until it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	 "Then apply pressure on it with a bandage for constant compression, and leave it for the duration of three hours; then remove the bandage and take away the aloe, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then place on it a cotton swab soaked in vinegar until the spot turns red.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 "Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	 "And if you go, do this with some burning medicines that I have written about in the twelve treatises on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "But the cauterization should be done with iron, following this manner: it is formed as follows:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	 "It is called a 'nail' because its tip is shaped like the head of a nail, which has some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small protuberance.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	 "Then place it on the site of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the instrument is not shaken excessively — and turn the iron slowly and steadily.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	 "And if the part that is shaken by the movement of the chain reaches about half of it, then raise your hand to prevent the instrument from being shaken excessively, so that there will not be a flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 "Then soak a cloth in salt water and place it on the site, and leave it there for three days; then place a cloth with padding, and then treat with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	 "And if you go, cauterize with the tip of the scalpel according to this manner, and be careful not to cut an artery in this particular region that is not ancient.
Capitol quart.	 Capitol quart. Chapter four (or fourth chapter).
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	 Of the cautery for an old migraine.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	 When you cure migraine with the previous method of treatment that we have mentioned, and it is not effective, and sometimes due to the illness that what we said about the first cautery with medicine or cautery with fire is not enough for him, then you should heat the sharpened cautery until it turns white. This indicates on the painful spot a line lengthwise, which is the greater part of the finger, either this one or that one; and place your hand on it once and strongly, until you pierce the skin and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	 However, it is necessary for you to be careful not to continue to the jawbone, which is thick due to chewing, and that the tendon is not cut and the nerves that cause pain there, lest spasm occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	 And if it concerns the caution and precaution of bleeding from an artery that is cut, for there is fear in cutting it, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not skilled or experienced; therefore, leave the operation to someone more knowledgeable at first.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	 And I come with the reminder of the treatment for bleeding accidents due to archery according to its own manner, in its place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and the patient's body is tolerant, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have described, and care for the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	 And if you wish, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on archery wounds with two blades, and this is a better and more effective cautery.
Capitol .v.	 Chapter .5
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	 On the cauterization of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is not cured by laxatives or other treatments that I have mentioned in the previous section, then burn with a cautery, and this one is called "point", of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	 And then touch the tip of the fire, and lead it around the entire ear as if turning a wheel, or in a circle on each side if the pain is on one side.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	 Approach with the tip of the cautery along the edge of the ear little by little, until you have clearly felt the spot with your fingertip.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	 And if you apply the pointed cautery on the entire ear, and cut it off, then promptly care for the areas until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	 Chapter VI
De cauterizacio de turtura.	 About cauterizing the throat.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	 The throat which is cured and treated by cautery is only from the species that come through phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	 Avoid cauterizing the throat for conditions caused by dryness or nerve spasm.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	 When you treat this type of throat illness with potions, purges and gargles, and your treatment is not effective, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	 And place your cautery opposite the affected side, because softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	 The way to perform the cauterization is as follows: Cauterize with one cautery at the top of the ear, a little higher than the corner of the head, and with another on the temple, whose length should be equal to that of the thumb. Place your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of a cord is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	 And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a type of surgical instrument, the shape of which is shown in the previous illustration.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	 But this one is more delicate than that one, a little like bladders; and it is necessary to remove some of its excessive thickness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	 Then care for the area with water as has been processed before until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	 Chapter VII
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	 Of Cautery for Old Apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	 When apoplexy is old and you treat it with the water we mentioned and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that person with four cauteries: on all the corners of their head; and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	 And the manner of the cautery is done as was said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	 And it has been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and that is even more urgent; and then it should be cared for with processed water.
Capitol .viii.	 Chapter VIII
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	 On Cautery for Forgetfulness Caused by Fever
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	 It is necessary to give the patient at the beginning large bowls and pills to serve as purgatives.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	 And next, shave the entire head of the patient and place on his crown the plaster of wax described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	 And pause several times, because that is the manner of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	 And do this according to the order of the aforementioned treatment that I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	 And if by that the patient is healed well; and if not, then do three cauteries on the posterior part of his head, which descend from the most superior part of the head to the most inferior part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	 And pause between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cautery with the water that has been prepared.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	 But if you see an increase and the patient is not tolerating it well, then do a cautery in the middle of the area; and if you see a greater increase, then cauterize that on both corners.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	 Then cure it until it is healed; and the cauteries should be olive-shaped according to the form given above.
Capitol .ix.	 Chapter IX
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	 On the cautery of parasites and on softening the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	 Begin by processing the head for cleansing with jars and water as we have said; then shave the patient's head, then cauterize it in the middle of the head, and with a cautery on all the corners of the head, and with a cautery on the posterior part of him, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	 And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body from too much and the illness is strong, then cauterize with four cauteries on the spine of the back, and afterward cauterize until it is completely relieved of the pain of it, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	 And then care for that until it is healed, and this should be cauterized in olive oil.
Capitol .x.	 Chapter 10
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	 On the Cautery of Epilepsy
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	 Do not cauterize the epileptic unless that epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	 Therefore, it is necessary to cleanse the brain of him at the beginning with years and with the other cure that we have said in the division when the illness is great and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	 And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer gargarisms and masticators to serve as cleansers, before that for several days, with the improvement of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	 Then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the aforementioned method, and with another cautery on his occiput, and on each horn of the head, cauterize it.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	 And if the patient is strong and enduring, then use a cautery as I have mentioned, with paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	 And it should be cauterized with olive oil as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	 But if the patient is a child, then use a fine cautery in this manner.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter XI
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	 On Cauterizing Melancholy
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	 When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and gross flame, then use a cautery as we mentioned earlier, with the patient being in a state of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	 And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of fluid that turns into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them water to cleanse their brain, as previously described in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	 And then shave the patient's head, and then make a pigeon coop of it, placed decently on the crown, and then place that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	 And the patient should be seated, with their whole body supported.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	 And then apply a liniment; and it is more fitting to use an old remedy of sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	 And heat that one over the fire for a measured tempered warmth, which it is said they suffer more in themselves.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	 And then turn that one to the middle of their head within the circle, and pour it in until they are frozen.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	 And do this with the patient every day for a week, along with the other good treatments until they are healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that area with small points according to their size, unless you have your hand on a cautery prepared in this way: this is the type of cautery that soaks the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	 Then place that bandage soaked in water or in linseed oil.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter XII
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	 About the cautery of water descending into the eye.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	 When you have recognized the beginning of water in the eye by the signs that I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that purifies their head, and protect them from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	 And have them bathe in warm water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	 And then order them to shave their head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if the beginning is the outflow of water from both eyes, or with one stroke if the beginning is from one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	 Cut all the veins and arteries that are below the collarbone using a cautery; and let the cauteries be in that region, near the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	 And beware of blood loss when it is being cauterized; and if you see blood loss from him, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	 And I will come with wisdom in the extraction of arteries and their removal, and care for preventing blood loss.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	 And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries that are suitably produced.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter XIII
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	 On the Cautery of Old Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	 When tears from the eyes are old and persistent due to the veins and arteries that are visible on the outside of the head, and it is proven that this is an excess of phlegmatic humors, then cauterize with a cautery as we have mentioned in the chapter on water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries in the neck below the temples, and with two cauteries in the neck below the bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	 And if you need to add [more], then cauterize that along the entire length of the tail of the eye on the edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	 Capítulo XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	 Sobre la cauterización del olor desagradable del nariz.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	 Cuando tratas a alguien con el remedio que hemos mencionado en la división y tu tratamiento no es efectivo, entonces prepara y da al paciente cochias para beber durante tres noches; luego ráspale el cabello y cauteriza con un cauterio de hierro o un cauterio de olivo.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	 Luego cauteriza con un cauterio de clavo y dos cauterios en cada una de las cejas, dejando un poco de cabello entre ellos.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	 Y ten cuidado para que no quemes demasiado esa área.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	 Y esta es la forma del cauterio de clavo.
Capitol .xv.	 Capítulo XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	 Sobre la cauterización para ablandar los párpados de los ojos.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Cuando los párpados de los ojos se ablandan debido a una enfermedad o humedad, entonces cauteriza ese párpado con un cauterio con este cauterio lunar; y esta es su forma:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	 Y si lo haces, cauteriza ese párpado en cada una de las cejas, dejando un poco entre ellas y dos cauterios a lo largo de toda la parte de las cejas.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	 And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyelid.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	 And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the quantity that one-third of the eyelid is burned.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter XVI
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	 On the cautery of the eye when the eyelashes turn inward and close the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	 When the eyelashes of the eye turn inward so that they puncture the eye, cautery is performed on them in two ways: either by burning or with a cauterizing medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	 If the cautery is by fire, command the patient beforehand to let their eyelashes grow as those which are untrimmed; and if it hurts them, then you should strengthen their eyes with a bandage so that they are not worse off until the eyelashes have grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	 When they have grown back and are trimmed, then place the patient's head on your lap, and carefully touch the edge of the eyelid with a probe, in the shape of a holly leaf, beginning at the eyelashes.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	 And then place a piece of cotton soaked in egg white or a poultice of fenugreek on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	 And then heat the cautery, the shape of which is this.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	 And then cauterize on the figure you have marked, little by little, in visible spots, until the surface of the tendon is burned as if it were a myrtle leaf, clearly evident.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	 The sign of the success of this operation is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs around it raised above the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	 And so lift your hand and let it be for three days, and then place on it cotton with a border until the crust has dried up.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then treat that area with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	 But if the hair returns for any reason to its original state and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery on that area just as you did at first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	 But if the hair is on the lower eyelid, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural place and is smoothed so that the hairs do not touch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 Here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	 Sure, let's translate this step-by-step:
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	 And place the finger on the medicine and press it slightly without removing it until the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for the bite is in them like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	 And thus when he perceives that he has found the bite, then release the medicine and move it with your finger; thus when the biting stops, then remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; and at this point consider if you see the eyelid raised as if washed by the constriction of fire or by incision, for at that moment it is well; and if not, return to applying the medicine on the spot where the medicine was not previously applied and do not stop until your operation is complete and the wound is healed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	 Then place on him a cloth with padding until the swelling of the abscess has subsided, and then treat it with a healing ointment or another until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	 And it is necessary for you to perform your operation with careful vigilance so that no part of the medicine falls into the wound, and if the eyelid becomes softened after some days and any hair touches the wound, then apply more medicine on that spot where the eyelid is softened, in the same manner as at the beginning, and then bandage it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	 And know that human feet are varied according to their size and smallness, and therefore your treatment is made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	 And the way of rectitude should not be hidden from him who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	 On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	 When you cure a fistula with the water we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not work, then you should cauterize it according to this manner: tell the patient to place his head on your shoulder, and let some assistant hold his head between your hands in such a way that it is not moved or shaken by his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	 Then place cotton wool soaked in egg white or birdlime over the patient's eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And then heat the cautery, of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	 which should be concave, like the shape of a reed or a vulture's feather, with one end used for the cautery.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	 And if you wish, let it penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	 And if you wish, it may be so as you attempt.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	 But, however, that which is hollow is better for the task at hand.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	 Then press on the fistula if it is open, and draw out of it blood and dry it up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	 And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	 Then place over it the cautery which is well-lit, and with that hand hold a little above the cautery of the nostril towards the bridge of the nose, so that your hand does not err or the patient becomes anxious; then place the cautery in the groove of the nostril and corrupt it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	 And therefore if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and leave it thus for three days, and then place over that wound a bandage and surround it with drying ointment until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	 But if eleven days have passed and it is not healed, then place over it corrosive medication until the bone is exposed and it is scraped according to what is convenient in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	 And there is another manner of cauterizing a fistula which some first said: take the place of the fistula and open it, and then place in that fissure a very thin piece of which is the form of it; and pour into it as much as one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand with a camaium with good tension, so that the patient is not discomforted because the melted lead does not reach the nostril of that; and you must place over the nostril of the patient a cotton swab impregnated in egg white or in water, for lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing. ➤
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	 And if the fistula is healed with the method mentioned before using cautery and care, it's good; but if not, then it's necessary to administer a traction through the nose and reduce the fistula back into the body of the nose according to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	 Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	 On the Cauterization of the Crack of the Buttocks.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	 Many times these cracks occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	 Therefore, when you treat those cracks with the method we have mentioned in the divisions and it does not benefit your treatment, then apply a small pointed cautery knife according to this manner that follows:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	 And let the concavity of it be according to the subtlety of the little knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	 Then place this carefully into those cracks until the cautery reaches the bottom of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat it with wax until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	 On the Cauterization of a Fistula in the Mouth
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 When an abscess develops in the soft palate or on the hard palate or between the teeth, and it swells up, and then bursts, and becomes chronic, and foul-smelling pus is produced, making a fistula, and you treat it but the treatment does not benefit, then you should heat a cautery according to how much will be inserted into the fistula, and then place this heated [cautery] in the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron reaches its bottom, and do this one or two times; and then treat it with the method we have mentioned for treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	 And therefore, if the pus is drained and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to uncover the area and remove the rotten bones according to what will be found in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	 Chapter XX
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	 Of the cauterization of teeth and softening of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	 When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you have treated them with medicines but to no avail, then place the patient's head in your lap. And quickly prepare the cautery, whose form will be described below, so that you place the tip of the cautery over the tooth and insert it into the cavity, and hold your hand a little behind so that the patient feels the heat of the fire on the root of the tooth when it reaches there.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	 Then lift your hand and then repeat with the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	 And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it there for an hour, and then spit it out, because the decayed tooth is stopped and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupt moisture is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter XXI
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	 Of the use of the caustic to treat toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	 When toothache is caused by cold, or if there is swelling or worms present and you cannot cure it with medicine, then cauterize in that area according to two methods: either cauterize with a cow's horn, or cauterize with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	 To cauterize with a horn is to take a cow's horn and place it in the coals of the fire, then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of the horn, then dip that wrapped horn into hot water, and quickly apply it to the painful tooth until it becomes numb.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	 And repeat this process several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	 And if you wish, dip wool or cotton in the aforementioned liquid, and place it on the painful tooth, and place hot iron on top of it until the heat reaches the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	 However, the cauterization with fire should be done using a small hollow tube of iron or brass, and there should be some wax or grease inside to prevent the heat from reaching the patient's mouth too directly.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	 And then ignite the cautery in the shape that will be used, and place it on the tooth while keeping your hand on it until the cautery is cooled; and do this several times because the pain will decrease either on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	 And it is advisable that through the application of that cautery, the patient should fill his mouth with good water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out; and this is how to shape the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	 And cauterize with whatever material you see fit, according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	 And this is how the cannula should be made:
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	 On Cautery for Protrusions
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	 When protrusions are caused by phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to digestive medicines, and you see their digestion improving slightly, then ignite the cautery in the shape that follows: it should have two open ends so that smoke can escape from one end while the other end is applied to the abscess. Place the heated cautery on the protrusion once, or more if needed, until it reaches the core of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	 And if the abscess is small, then press the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and let it remain for three days, then place a cloth soaked in wine on top until that which the fire has burnt is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	 Then care for him with ointments, linen bandages, and cloths until he is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	 And the shape of the needle or cautery must be appropriate for this purpose.
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	 On cauterizing hoarseness of voice and constriction of the throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	 When humidity affects the throat of the lungs, especially when it is accompanied by coldness of the chest, it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at first with laxative medicines, and then cauterize them where the throat is depressed.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	 And take care not to penetrate with the cautery into the throat or burn too much of the neck area.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	 And cauterize that with another cautery at the joint of the neck at the last vertebra of him.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	 The cautery for it should be made in the same way as mentioned before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 Then care for that with water as mentioned earlier until he is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	 Of Cauterization for Lung Disease and Cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	 When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humors, and the patient does not have a fever or phlegm, and it is an old illness, then cauterize with two cauteries on the depression of the furcula in the swollen and bulging areas; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between two small bones; and let the cauteries be nailed according to the aforementioned form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	 And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cautery called "punctum," the form of which precedes in the puncturing for earache.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 And let there be points between them; and then treat with the water previously mentioned until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	 And the cauteries must have three branches, for cauterization is done with that: and you can do three cauteries in one go according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	 Of Cauterization for Tinnitus, which is the Head of the Ear.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	 When the head of the ear is dislocated due to lubricating humors and does not return on its own, you must reduce its dislocation until it returns to its normal state. Then, with a slight movement, it will return to its place, as we have shown. Therefore, first reduce the dislocation, then place the patient on their back or side; and then raise the handle that is inside the auditory canal upwards with your left hand fingers if the joint is dislocated inward.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And then ignite the cautery which has two points; and this is its shape:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	 And then cauterize the vein until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will then have four points of cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And thus, subtle [points] according to the number of trials; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	 And sometimes it is done according to this count, because there are eight points for cautery.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	 And then sprinkle powdered salt on the cautery, and then make the patient rest, and let the limb not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	 And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and this is done later, then cauterize on the muscle with a pointed cautery or with many cautery points, because the joint will be strengthened and the moisture dried out and the patient will be cured.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter XXVI
De cauterizacio del stomac.	 On the Cauterization of the Stomach
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	 When there is cold and excessive moisture in the stomach to the point that it exits its composition and increases raumas in him, and if you continue with the manner of treatment without success, then it is necessary for the patient to be laid on his back, and to extend his hands and feet, and then cauterize him with three points: one cautery below the feet for the length of a finger with a pointed cautery, and two cauteries beside the spine of the first cautery, so that the figure of cauterization is triangular; and ensure that they are not too close together, lest they cause burning.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	 And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the heel.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	 And let the shape of the cautery be according to this form without addition. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	 And the stomach should be punctured in that place where you are afraid of this cautery: and it is that you know on the stomach to point according to the quantity you wish with a probe, and then cauterize that with a cautery in those points; and then cure that with the preceding cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	 On cauterizing the cold foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	 When pain in the foot occurs due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness until its normal fullness is expelled through superfluous exit, and the patient is cured with the water we have mentioned and not with food, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back with his head raised, and examine with a probe three cauteries according to this form and quantity, placing them under the foot below the hypochondria, which is called the decubitus of man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	 And let there be a space between each cautery according to the thickness of the said [cautery or part], and let the cauteries be placed according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	 And do not press too hard with the cauteries.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	 And if the amount of water that is drawn is less than half the volume of the bladder, it is not well adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; then they should sit down, having already extended their legs, and raised their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	 And this is how to make the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	 And it is possible for you to make these cauteries with a pointed blade, if you have the skill and judgment in this art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	 And be careful not to press too hard during cauterization, and let the bladder be drawn completely for the entire body to be emptied and to enter into the intestines, because the bladder is delicate here; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter 28
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	 On piercing an abscess in the foot with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	 When a person has an abscess on the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will experience severe pain without sharpness.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	 Certainly! Let's translate the provided text line by line into English:
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	 "And cauterize with that [cautery] and burn until the entire cord is burned away, until it reaches the hipbone, until blood appears.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	 And treat that wound with the treatment of other ulcers until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	 And it is not appropriate to use this type of cautery except for those which are prolonged in the art of medicine and are known by most ill people; however, if you have attempted this operation a few times with success, then you should abandon that one and choose this method instead, as it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	 About the cauterization of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	 The ancient physicians used to cauterize the root of the ribs in pleurisy according to this manner, and that is what you should do: take a long, dry reed of moderate thickness, roughly the size of your finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	 Then dip that reed in oil and place it on the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that spot which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauteries below, one slightly slanting towards the side under the chin, and with two cauteries on that which is slanting between the fifth rib and the twelfth, slanting a little towards the back; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the sides of the back; and with one cautery in that spot which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on either side of the foot, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	 And it is not necessary that you place your hand with the cautery, but rather have it in plain view of the patient during the procedure.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	 And some ancient physicians used to say that there are some men who use an iron cautery similar to a ray and ignite it, placing it in the area between the ribs until they reach the abscess and drain the pus, as we have said regarding the abscess of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	 But in this procedure with the cautery, one should not act without caution, for one could die immediately if an unhealed fistula is pierced.
Capitol .xxx.	 Chapter .30
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	 On the cauterization of the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	 When you treat the illness of the spleen with what has been said about treatment in the division, and your treatment is not effective, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are correct. One of them is that you make three or four cauteries along the length of the spleen, following the figure of the foot's cauteries, whose figure has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	 And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery should be the same as that which has been said for the foot's cauteries likewise.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	 "And do not press your hand with the cautery; let the patient be on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	 "And there is another way to cauterize, which is to heat the cautery having two openings, as we have mentioned in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lift the chain that is at the end of the mug, so that the left side of the patient lies flat.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	 "And let your elevation with which you lift the chain be according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	 "And then insert the two openings, heating them well, into that opening where you have penetrated with the chain from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	 "And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	 "And if you wish, cauterize with a three-opening cautery.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	 "And then care for the cautery since it has ceased to throw out pus for too many days, because it is more convenient than the other causes mentioned in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	 "Chapter .31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	 "On Cauterizing Dropsy Patients
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	 "Cautery is not used in dropsy patients except for the bladder specifically.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	 When you treat the dropsical patient with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another cautery on the kidney, another cautery on the spleen, two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, one cautery on the right foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	 And let the depth of the cauterization be appropriate to the thickness of the cord.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	 And then leave the cautery open so that it may discharge pus for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	 And do not evacuate the patient of treatment near the cautery with water that is necessary, so that there may be added to him two intentions, and he will be quickly healed with the help of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	 The form of the cautery with which the stomach is cauterized should be pointed like the one described above, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its form as mentioned earlier.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	 On Cauterization of Feet and Testicles
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	 When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in the place that is between the auricular and anular bones, and lift your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then lift your hand, and do not return it completely, because the stagnant water will rise.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	 Es el procedimiento con el cauterio de la siguiente manera: Y entonces haz sobre ambos costados dos puntos de cauterización, y en cada punto se hará una pequeña incisión con la punta del bisturí.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	 Sea el cauterio del tamaño de la hernia: uno en lo alto y otro en el medio de la hernia; y sobre cada hernia, haz dos puntos de cauterización.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	 Deja la herida abierta sin curarla durante mucho tiempo para que cualquier agua pueda drenar de ella.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	 Entonces cura con esos métodos que hemos mencionado.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Capítulo XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	 Sobre la cauterización del ombligo.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	 Cuando el ombligo está afectado por frío y humedad, lo que debilita las virtudes, es decir, la virtud digestiva y retentiva, que están en el estómago e intestinos, se cura de esta manera: evitar el viento y los alimentos crudos. A veces el paciente sufre un desequilibrio en la virtud, entonces haz una gran cauterización sobre su estómago, siguiendo el procedimiento anterior para la cauterización del estómago, con una cauterización circular y cuatro pequeñas cauterizaciones alrededor del ombligo, así como una pequeña cauterización en forma de clavo; y una cauterización sobre la parte superior del abdomen, ya sea grande o dos pequeñas.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	 And if you see excessive humidity and the patient tolerating it, then cauterize that area on the penis and the intestines, and firmly place two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal region, because this is a perfect cure for improving which there will be no error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 **Chapter XXXIV.**
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	 On the Cautery of Old Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	 When there are old hemorrhoids in nature, either from gross humor infiltration or corrupt humidity, and they are treated with the water we mentioned in the division and do not confer a complete cure, then cauterize with three cauteries under the small of the back, close to the spine, in the shape of a small triangle, and one on top of the navel, which goes through two fingers' width.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	 And if you suspect that his stomach is infiltrated and his food is not digested, and his face appears swollen, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; and one on the spleen, and another on his liver with a pointed cautery, and leave the cautery open for some time, and then cure him until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	 It looks like you provided the title of a chapter rather than a full sentence. If you can provide a complete sentence or passage from the text, I'll be happy to help translate it into English.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	 About cauterizing an artery near an abscess.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	 When you cut an artery, then you heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	 Then insert that heated (cautery) into the cut artery and continue pressing with your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And do this once or twice, because if the arteries are too many, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and then treat them with water that you have mixed with ointments until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	 And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it is more beneficial for healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 Chapter Thirty-Six
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	 About cauterizing fistulas that are made in the lower parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	 When nature does not obey the work we have described in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, let him be healed with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	 Therefore, when there is a fistula in the lower part of the body and it is old, it produces pus and corrupt humors; thus, what is most worthy to do is to probe it with a fine probe, and then measure its depth with the previously mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	 Approach with the cautery that resembles a stingray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	 Then approach and apply that cautery, heated in this manner, according to the degree of the patient's pain.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 And repeat with that cautery until those corrupt bodies are burned at least once or twice or three times, according to the degree of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	 And be careful not to burn the nerves or veins; or if the fistula goes toward the bladder or intestines, then avoid all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy and thick place that you judge will not penetrate deeply.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 Then care for the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	 And if the area is sealed and the materials are drained from it, and it remains thus for a long time, then you know that it has been completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	 And if the materials are not drained from it, then you know that it is penetrating into the marrow of the rotten bone, or this results from those causes which will be remembered in their place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter XXXVII
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	 On Cauterizing Hemorrhoids
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	 When in the hemorrhoids there is pain caused by cold or excessive flatulence, and because of this the patient's rectum becomes irritated, then it is necessary to cauterize that area on the hemorrhoids with a cautery on each hemorrhoid with a needle-like cautery, as will be remembered.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	 And then they proceed to cauterize with the second one a little below, so that three consecutive cauteries will follow, and thus they will be stronger in support.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Capitulo XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	 Sobre la cauterización de la vejiga.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	 Cuando ocurre en la vejiga debilidad y suavización por frío y humedad, hasta el punto en que el paciente no puede retener la orina, entonces cauterice esa área un poco más abajo de la vejiga, donde comienzan los pelos del pubis, y caucerize con un cauterio a la derecha y otro a la izquierda de él.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	 Y que la longitud de cada cauterio sea según la cantidad de los nudos del muslo; y caucerice esa área con un cauterio en la parte más baja de la espalda, o con dos cauterios si es necesario.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	 Y que el cauterio sea clavado según que se procesa.
Capitol .xxxix.	 Capítulo XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	 Sobre la cauterización del estómago.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	 Cuando hay frío y humedad en el estómago, y por eso se impide la concepción, y las menstruaciones son corruptas y se retrasan, y ocurre dolor durante su evacuación, entonces se debe cauterizar ese lugar con tres cauterios alrededor del ombligo, como hemos dicho en la cauterización de la vejiga; y un cauterio más abajo en la espalda, o dos cauterios, y que los cauterios sean clavados.
Capitol .xl.	 "Capitulum .xl." translates to "Chapter 40" in English. In this context, it appears that the text is divided into sections or chapters for easier reference and navigation.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	 "De cauterización de la dislocación del tobillo.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	 When moisture is secreted at the area of the anus, and these causes are displaced from their place, a sign of this is that one part extends over the other when compared to each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	 And the location of the dislocation is found in him who is bent.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	 Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the area of his anus with a circular-shaped cautery, because you will find a sign with a probe in the circle around the area, as if it were turned around, and so that the area falls exactly in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	 And let the form of the previously mentioned cautery be used in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	 And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize with three cauteries using a large olive-sized cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And let the cautery be made according to the thickness of the entire cord; and then care for him until he is cured.
Capitol .xli.	 Chapter XL I
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	 On the Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	 When pain occurs in the area of the anus, and its cause is cold and moisture, the patient is cured with the water we have mentioned and not with wine, and this is ancient (practice). Therefore, you should purge the patient of thick humors with foul-smelling pills or artificial pills; and then cauterize him.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	 And the method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterize with burning medicine or cauterize with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	 Sir, according to two well-known methods, one of which is to cauterize that area near the ankle with three triangular cauteries in this manner, and do so with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	 And let the space between each cautery be the thickness of a finger, whether the cauteries are olive-sized or larger.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	 However, sometimes the cauteries should be placed halfway up the ankle, as there are four of them.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	 And if you wish, you can also cauterize with the circle that precedes the form in the treatment of ankle dislocation, which should be a continuous and burning circle around the entire ankle.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	 And this is the method of cauterization for gout when the pain is limited to the ankle and does not extend into the hip.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	 However, if the pain extends into the hip, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the hip in the place where the patient turns towards the pain; and with one cautery on the knee, about four fingerbreadths below the patella.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	 And if the cautery tool is a blade, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	 And if the patient reports that the pain has spread to other parts of the body besides the feet, then cauterize those areas as well with a pointed cautery, using three or four points, or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	 And if the patient reports that the pain extends to the thighs, then cauterize those areas with a blade cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	 And be careful in all cautery that you do not burn the nerves or large blood vessels with the cautery, so that you do not harm the patient or cause complications.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	 And I have seen one or two cases where they cauterized on the ankle and ended up burning through to the bone, and the foot became swollen with inflammation until it was completely rotten.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	 And as a result, a severe case of abdominal pain followed, and then death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	 And if the pain is in two places at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	 And the wise ones said about cautery with water, which is done in this way: make a circle of iron, the circumference of which should be half the size of a palm; and let its holes be according to the thickness of a fingertip bone or a little less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And within that circle there should be another third; and the space between them should be the length of the night of the peacock; and those circles should be open on two sides; and the length of these chains should be one night or two nights, and make on these borders a decent iron fence around the circles; and this is its shape:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	 Then it should be heated in the fire until it becomes red and throws off sparks, and then it should be placed on the open side of the ulcer, with the patient lying on their left side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	 And therefore cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then leave that for three days; and then apply a bandage to it, leaving the wound open for too many days; and then treat that with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	 Al-Zahrawi says: O, my son, we have used this type of cautery rarely because of the fear of its consequences and because few people know how to care for it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	 But with the other cauteries, those who have suffered from them find relief with that.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	 But the cautery with adherent medicines should be made in two circles having a perforated arm, through which is placed the handle of an iron rod; let the length of the wall be two nights or whatever it may be.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	 And if the space which is between each finger of the hand is opened below and above, and they contain themselves between them in this manner:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	 And then place the patient lying on their side on the bed, and press your hand over the ankle area; and then take some warm water and pour it between two circles, and let its heat increase gradually, and keep that for the duration of one hour, and endure the patient's biting and burning — because this bite is like that of fire — until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	 And then lift your hand with the instrument and wipe away all the warm water from the ankle with cool water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	 And then let it be for three days and place a compress on it until the blackness of the burn has subsided, and leave that for several days, and it will become itchy; this is called "jaundice.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	 And if the pain extends into the thigh or leg, make a statue for him that contains water, as is done with the foot.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	 And this is the manner of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	 Recipe for lye and quicklime, equally divided into two parts, grind them together and place in a new bladder through which a small hole is made, according to the amount that enters his vein.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	 And place the bottom of that bladder inside another bladder, and pour over it lye and quicklime two parts of soft water which covers those by one finger's width, and once you have pressed them with your hand for a good compression, allow the sharp water to descend from his vein into the other bladder.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	 And then adjust all that water, and pour it over renewed quicklime and lye, because at this time it will have a very strong caustic effect, which is used in many medical operations and for cauterizing other members, since the operation is of fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	 And in this manner with some medicines with which one is cauterized, such as resin and melted honey and soap, thus mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	 And Gualterus recounts from an ancient author the operation and treatment with which is cured pain of water and sciatica vein, and he says that nothing better can be done for this, and he says that no other treatment is needed, and because it is cured once as it is recounted, for strongly as that enters into the bath, immediately it goes out from him.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	 And let it be taken from the common henbane plant; if green is not found, take a fresh fig; both should be crushed with a little gray salt and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the hip, or on the thigh, and let it be bound.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	 And let it be left in place for three hours or as long as the patient feels relief from the swelling.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	 And then immediately have that person bathe and once their body is warmed, let them enter the sun, for the pain will cease and they will be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	 And know that one should not use cautery with these remedies except after the body has been purged.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	 But Escorides said that when the vein is cauterized with the goat's hair, it benefits more; and let the cautery be made in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the soles.  (Note: "Escorides" refers to Dioscorides, a Greek physician and botanist)
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	 And then take dry goat's hair and burn it with fire until it becomes charcoal; and then place it on the wool, pressing until it is extended.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	 Based on the given context and the similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a possible translation for the new sentence:
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	 And this method of cauterization is called "cautery of cows".
Capitol .xlii.	 "Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	 "On the Cauterization of Back Pain
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	 "Sometimes pain in the back is caused by various reasons such as falling, hitting, or excessive discharge, and similar causes due to the infusion of cold and wet substances.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	 "And one should not perform cautery except for this specific type, which is caused by the infusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	 "Therefore, it is necessary to first evacuate the patient with purgative pills and similar remedies, which should be applied on the back where the pain is located in three lines according to its length. Then, with a tent in each line, cauterize as much as needed, depending on the patient's tolerance and the strength of the treatment.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	 "And let the cauterization be done using a pointed cautery tool.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	 "And if you wish, perform cauterization with three or four cauteries, using a medium-sized pointed cautery like this:
Capitol .xliii.	 "Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	 "On the Cauterization of the Onset of Jaundice
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	 Based on the provided context and the similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, let's translate the sentence:
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	 And you find in the lower spine of the back and in the knots that are already beginning to protrude above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	 And therefore when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery as follows:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	 that takes the cautery around the entire vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	 And if you wish, cauterize around the edge of the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three times.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	 And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	 And then treat the area so that it is healed with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	 But be careful not to administer cautery in a case of swelling caused by a nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	 Chapter XLIV
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	 On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that penetrate each part of the body, and when this pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	 And therefore, when gout caused by cold is treated and the pains are not removed, then cauterize them.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	 And you should cauterize that area of evacuation around the joint of the foot with many cauteries. ‌
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And it should be an olive-shaped cautery, which looks like this:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	 If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then use a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	 If the pains rise into the joints or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize that [joint] on each side with three or four complete cauteries using this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	 And if you need to make more cauteries than these, then cauterize that [area] and do not press too hard with the cautery beforehand; just surround the tip of the cord.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	 And if the pain spreads into the joint and back, then administer the cautery which we mentioned in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	 And if the pains are only in the hands, and it is called suagra, then make points along the circumference of the fingers as they turn, making points on these two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	 And if any pains remain in the fingers, then make points along the circumference of each finger and at the tip of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	 And if the pain spreads to the elbows or muscles after several days, then cauterize each of them completely from all sides.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	 And you do not evacuate the patient by good management and reception of medicines, because if it is done with good management and the inflammation is removed by this cautery, he will be healed, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	 Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	 On Cauterization of Ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	 When there is a rupture in the groin and intestines protrude through the hernia, and this begins to happen, then you must tell the patient to stop eating on that day and use gentle remedies so that the opening of his abdomen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	 Then follow the patient closely between your hands on his back, and command him to hold his breath until it is expelled or the hernia or intestines appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	 Then return with these words and signs, trying to cauterize the rupture on the bone of the pubis, indicating the point where it is similar to the width of a circle at the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Then ignite the cautery, which has this shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	 until it is very hot and throws off sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	 It seems like you've already provided a translation for the sentence:
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	 Here's the translation for the given sentence:
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	 And observe wisely the position of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, lest you burn that intestine, causing death or other great harm to come upon the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	 And know that when using the cautery, if you avoid the bones, your procedure will not be successful.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	 And it is necessary for the cautery used on children to be delicate according to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	 And then care for the area of the cauterization for three days with bandages until the scab from the fire has been removed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat him with other ointments until he is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	 And let the patient lie on their back for forty days, so that the site and the wound may be sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	 And it is necessary to regulate his nourishment according to the length of time of his treatment, which will prevent his stomach from becoming full and keep the intestine from coming out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	 And when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer a properly prepared diet, and let him have that for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	 And he should be restricted from work and excessive food and drink, and from loud voices, because if he follows this complete regimen of healing, he will certainly be cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	 And I will explain the treatment of hernias in other parts of the abdomen, and at first, if you do not want them to return, then cauterize the hernia with a round cautery according to its size; and whatever is extruded from the cavity should be treated as described in the third part; and then treat it with what we have said, and it will be effective.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	 And some say that the hernia should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is indicated by experience.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	 And a line is placed that goes along the latitude on the back above the hernia, and another line above it; and you place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	 Chapter 46
De cauterizacio de torcio.	 On Cauterization for Testicular Swelling
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	 When in certain members there is pain due to injury or bruising and this pain persists for a long time and does not respond to medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	 And let the cautery be appropriate for each member according to its size and smallness, and the location of the swelling and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	 Therefore, if the first cautery heals him, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on him; for it is customary for those pains to be punctured from one member to another that is closest to it, so you must reach those with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter 47
De cauterizacio de lepra.	 On Cauterization for Leprosy
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	 Lepers are sometimes treated with cautery for great benefit, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	 Therefore, when you wish to cauterize such a person, consider if the leprosy is common and that type has been treated with water as we have said in the division, and it does not spread. However, if it does spread, be afraid for the patient that the corruption may encompass all of his body and all of his complexion; then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, a second lower than that, reaching to the end of the hair; and two on both temples; and one behind, either on the nape or on the occipital protuberance.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	 And finish by applying the cautery to his head a little until it presses on the bone with a slight impression, and from there the scabies should be removed, so that the expiration of gross vapors is relieved from him; and cauterize on the spleen as necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	 And be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the sole of the foot.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	 And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the knee and with another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the chest.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	 And know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery itself, just like they do in their sleep, because their body is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	 And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and the joints, as previously stated in the description of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Then care for the cautery with bran mixed with honey and with other treatments until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	 Chapter XLVIII
De cauterizacio de stupor.	 On Cauterization for Stroke.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	 When some member is benumbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils and plasters, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that benumbed member with cauteries according to the size of the member, whether large or small.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	 And let your cautery enter the thickness of the cord a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then care for that with ointment until it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	 And sometimes a certain numbness is cauterized which extends to the hands and feet, as well as the vertebrae of the back, and after cutting the nerves that move that limb, the numbness is removed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	 But do not presume about this unless one who is wise in the anatomy of the limbs and the pathways of the nerves that move throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	 Chapter XLIX
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	 On the Cauterization of Ulcers that are Malignant
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	 When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you cauterize it with a pointed cautery for a short period until the whiteness and the redness of it are removed, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	 And then it is cared for with a mixture of barley flour and lentils with rose oil and hart's-tongue leaves, and with pigeon blood or sparrow blood, each being one part and all mixed together, and then a cloth is dipped in it and placed on the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	 Chapter LI
De cauterizacio de cranc.	 On the Cauterization of Crabs (scabies).
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	 When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it turns.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	 And the wise men say that it should be cauterized with the final cautery in the middle; however, I have not seen this, because I fear that it will become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	 And it is more appropriate that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circle as we have said, or with many small cauteries.
Capitol .li.	 Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	 On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	 When some hemorrhoids are delayed in maturation, and this is due to the excessiveness of them, or to the state of the patient, who is old and feeble, with little blood, or due to the time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the hemorrhoids; then cauterize around it with many small puncturing cauteries; and afterward leave it alone so that it may hasten in maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	 But if you wish to perforate it with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose shape resembles it; and place that in the middle of the hemorrhoid until the core is penetrated.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you cauterize in that place which is lower, it is to relieve the arm's body; and then heal the inside part so that it may be healed.
Capitol .lii.	 Chapter .52
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	 On Cautery for Erosion
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	 Erosion is the progressive destruction of a member, which eats away at it like fire consuming dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	 Therefore, if you see that erosion in a place where it is suitable to apply cautery with fire, then heat up the cautery needles very few and large, according to what is appropriate for that place where there is erosion.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	 And then cauterize it completely from all sides until you have removed all the erosion and there is no trace of it left.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	 And then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized places a bandage of cloth soaked in oil until all the scabs are completely removed and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	 Then heal that with flesh-generating ointment.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	 But if after three days you see that the flesh is growing healthy and there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then reapply the cautery on those places where it is still corrupt.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	 And it is treated with some sharp medicine because that is similar to a cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	 However, cauterization with fire is more effective for the cure of pus.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	 And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, so take it when you need it for him.
Capitol .liii.	 Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	 On the cauterization of wounds and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	 Often it is observed that in the parts of the foot of a sick person there are wounds called "wounds", which are deep and cause pain; and these are cauterized in two ways: by cautery with fire and by cautery with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	 However, the fire cautery is that you heat the cautery in a similar way to a vulture's beak, which should be made of iron according to the size of the wound on all sides, and it should be of thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	 Then place that heated cautery on the wound and turn your hand with the cautery around the wound until the cautery reaches the depth of the wound.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	 And leave it there for three days until it begins to form a scab.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	 Then bandage it with crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the bandage on overnight, for that will remove its causes.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for the area with an ointment made from generative flesh until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	 And if it is not converted, and many veins appear on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must apply cautery with water on those areas. Take a small metal or iron tube or goose quill, and place it over the nail; next, pour a small amount of hot water into the tube, hold the tube with your hand, and roll it gently all around the affected area, pressing the edges of the tube against the skin surrounding the nail. The hot water will penetrate through the pores in the skin; let the patient endure the heat for about an hour, then remove the tube, as the nail with its root will have been eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	 And do this for each affected area until you have treated all such areas on the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	 Then care for those pustules whose root hairs have been eradicated with the waters of ointments that stimulate flesh growth.
Capitol .liiii.	 Chapter 3
De cauterizacio de tremor.	 On the Cauterization of Tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	 When someone experiences tremors due to nerve damage or fever of the same cause, or for a similar reason, it is necessary that you cauterize them with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, one between each vertebra; and with cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, using olive oil cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	 And the tremor will subside, hastening the healing of the diseased condition.
Capitol .lv.	 Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	 On the cauterization of white (leukoderma) lesions on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	 When white spots appear on the body and become pustules or cracks formed from thick, corrupt materials, it is necessary at the beginning of their appearance to cauterize over each lesion with a subtle cautery made of myrtle stalk, the tip of which is extended with fire; or with a long surgical needle; or with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	 And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize these lesions at the beginning of their emergence in this manner; and they are not aggravated, and the excess causing them is dispersed, and they heal from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	 However, it is necessary to do this after bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.	 Capitulo LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	 De la cauterización del flujo de sangre causado por un corte con un arco.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	 When this happens to someone, then you take the arrow with your hand at the opening of the wound, and press over it with your thumb until the flow of blood stops under your thumb, and it does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	 Then place in the fire the olive-wood cauteries, both small and large, by the count of twelve, and blow on them until they are all ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	 Then take one of them, either small or large, according to the location and the wound where the artery has been cut; quickly apply it to that vein after you have removed your thumb, and hold the cautery until the blood is sealed and constrained.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	 And if the blood is still coming out of the artery's opening when you remove your thumb and take out the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from those that have been prepared in the fire, and continue doing this with one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	 And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, lest another ailment come upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	 Know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either by cautery as we have said, or by extraction if it has not been extracted, for when it has been extracted, its extremities are burnt and the blood is stopped. Or let it be tied with thread or a ligature by strong pressure, or medicines should be applied to them which have the virtue of constricting the blood; and they should be strengthened with a cushion by decent compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	 It seems like you're trying to translate a medieval medical text. Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Comensa la segonda partida.	 Based on the pattern you've provided, I would translate "Comensa la segonda partida" as:
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	 Of cutting and piercing and cupping and of phlebotomy and of wounds and their likenesses.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	 These are the words of Al-Zahrawi.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	 We have already said in the first chapter everything about illnesses in which it is appropriate to use a hot iron or cautery and combustible medicine, and the occasions and causes of this, and the instruments necessary for it with the shapes of the cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters from the superior part of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	 And I will proceed in this chapter in the same way, so that the seeker may find relief for what he has asked about.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	 And before I begin this, it is important, my son, that you learn that in this chapter, it is about the second part of what was in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	 And because it is necessary to have great caution in this, since in the operations which are frequently carried out in this chapter, which involve evacuation with blood (which contains life), you must be careful not to pierce a vein or make an incision on an abscess or open an ulcer or clean a wound or extract an arrowhead or remove a stone and similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	 And of all those is accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most cases death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	 And I warn you that this should not happen to you, for sometimes a person with mild symptoms may have many serious illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	 And of them there are some who will go away with their illness and it will be light for him, the death, because of the severity of what he finds in his illness, and because of the length of his illness, and with the illness is fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	 And among them is one who gives you his possessions and goods, for whom you are waiting in good health; but his illness is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	 Therefore, it is not wise to agree with someone who comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than your generosity and greed; do not assume any cause without proven knowledge that confirms what is best for you, and to whom a praiseworthy succession will come.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	 And use in the care of all your sick patients prognosis and diagnosis to guide you towards health, for in that lies your help in gaining fame, memory, praise, and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	 "Oh, children, may God inspire in you his understanding and not remove your direction and protection, for that is in his hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	 "And I have organized this chapter, distinguishing it into sections following the previous chapter on cautery, from the care of the head to the feet, so that what you ask for and need may be made easier for you.
Capitol primier.	 "First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	 "On the treatment of water contained in a child's head.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	 "Know that this illness, which is often seen in children, comes from birth and when the nurse tightly holds the child's head without loosening it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	 "And sometimes it happens due to an unknown cause that is not understood.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	 "However, I have only seen this illness in children; and in all of those whom I have seen, death has followed, and thus it seems to me that their fate is sealed.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	 "And I have seen that a child whose head was full of water had their head continually enlarged until they could not bear themselves because of the size of their head, and moreover, the moisture increased until death by fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	 And this moisture is accumulated either between the tendon and the bone or beneath the bone on the hip.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	 Because the operation in that case, if the moisture is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, it is necessary for you to cut in the middle of the head with a slit in the length, and let the length of the slit be two nights until the moisture runs out, and this is the form of the spatula.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 And therefore if the moisture is more abundant and the abscess is larger, then there are two slits in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	 And if the moisture is beneath the bone, the sign of it is that you see the commissures of the head open on all sides and the water is pressed out when you press it with your hand from within and nothing is hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 It is necessary for you to cut in the middle of the head with three slits in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	 And then extract all the moisture at the incision; and then strengthen the slits with cloths and plasters; and then pour water on it from above with wine and oil for five days, and then remove the bandages and treat the wound with compresses and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and let the patient eat dry food of little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	 And there is another way of making an incision, which considers where the abscess appears and the collection of water, because sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or in the frontal area, or on the right side, or on the left side; therefore, you should make the incision where the abscess and the water collection appear, and do so as best as possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	 And observe that you do not cut the artery, lest blood flow out and cause the patient to die from loss of blood and moisture.
Capitol .ii.	 Chapter II
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	 On the incision of the arteries near the ears, known as temporal arteries.
Capitol segon.	 Chapter Two
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	 When there is some catarrh or pain in the eyes or feet, and it is persistent and does not respond to medication, then the final treatment for this is the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	 Therefore, when you want to incise those [arteries], the patient should raise their head and you should rub the area with rough cloth until the arteries are visible. Then tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; consider where the vein pulses, and on each side of the temples near the ears, press firmly until they disappear in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	 And then you should sign on the bowstring with a marker, and then make an incision in each [place?] with the sharp end of each blade, so that it penetrates into the bone, and this should be done according to the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	 And if you wish, insert the blade under the artery and cut it at the incisions on top of the areas [affected].
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	 And let the length of the incision be equal to two fingers' breadths, because when a vein is cut, blood exits with pulsating ejection, which jumps out frequently with each jump.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	 But if the bowstring does not appear at the incision, then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space equal to three fingers, and then sign with a marker, and go into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	 And the amount of blood that should be removed is one-sixth of a measure, and it should be removed from him more or less, and all this is according to the quantity that appears from the strength of the patient and the fullness of his bowstring.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 And then consider the wound, and therefore if something remains on the bone that looks like a chip, then incise it so that it does not become an infected abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then strengthen the wound with bandages and cloth bindings of linen, and then care for it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	 Chapter 3:
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	 On the removal of arrowheads that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	 When someone suffers from an ancient or acute migraine due to moisture and quality in the temples of the head, or a very intense old swelling similar to these, and it is not cured with the usual medical treatments, then we use in these cases the removal of arrowheads from the temples, or cauterization as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	 And the way to perform this operation and removal is that the patient shaves the hair from their temples; and direct your attention to the apparent arrowhead in the temple because it is shown to you by its own pulse, and it is hidden except in a few people due to intense cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	 And if it is hidden from you, then strengthen the patient's neck with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the arrowhead appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And then you take the spatula which has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	 And then you strip the ligament with that instrument until you reach the artery; and then pour oil on it and extract it from the superior parts until you remove it from the ligament and discover it from under the tunics, from every side.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	 But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the tip of the instrument, and then cut off a piece according to the length by which its extremities are lengthened and narrowed, and there will be no blood flow, because if they are not cut off, the blood will not rise completely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	 And then evacuate some blood, one to three times.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	 And if the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with a double strong silk thread or long cords, and do not cut off the putrefaction before the healing of the wound so that there will be blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	 And then you cut the excess which is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or about another hour later.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	 And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone with a scalpel cautery until its extremities are cut, and it will remain in place for that same work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	 And it is better that the patient has fever or is of inflamed complexion; because cautery is among those causes that help the drying humors, and therefore it is better in assistance.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	 And it is necessary to remove the arrowheads that have lodged in the ancient parts of the body, and then place them on cleanly made pillows, and then treat with dry medicines so that the flesh grows and bandages until it heals.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 And if during this operation there is bleeding from the arrow wound, then quickly use cautery or apply something to stop the bleeding, and hold it firmly until the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	 And if none of these causes is present, then place your finger on the wound until the blood clots, and rinse the wound with very cold water until the pain subsides, and bandage it as necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	 And this is easier for the removal of an arrow: you should cauterize the vein with this double-edged cautery, having first tested both spots with a probe, and then place each, very hot, until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that what is between them is lengthened, because they are not completely healed by this cautery. ➤
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	 And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	 And it should be the sharpness of two identical needles.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	 However, if they have less sharpness than two needles, it is better, because if they are as sharp as two needles, you may cut the flesh too quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	 Therefore, since in those (instruments) there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is retained within them and the flesh is cut more gently.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	 And this work is better for all works and lighter too.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	 And let the space be between two needles the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	 Chapter Four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	 On the care for bodies with sharp and acid tears from the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	 When the tears are acidic, and it is the body of those veins which are on the forehead outside the head, and there is no reason to apply any medical treatment in this case, sometimes the face of the patient becomes red, and they feel a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were ants walking, and the eyes of such patients become exhausted and wet to the point that their eyelashes are stuck together, and the eyelids are scratched by the sharpness of the tears. The ancients used to treat this condition with surgery, and they called this treatment "spassa.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	 And it is that you order the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three equally spaced incisions in the forehead according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	 And if the length of the incision is two digits: let the first incision be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little from the movement of the eyelids that are on the lacrimal gland, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	 And beware of the incisions of the arteries that are in two places, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	 And if the space of each incision is three digits wide.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	 And if you have a sponge or very dry cloth with which to dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	 Then insert the spatula of two pointed ends, and this is how its incision will be:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	 which begins at the temples and goes to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	 Then draw back with it all the skin that is between the two incisions up to the bone on top of which it lies, and then do this from the middle incision down to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	 And then approach this space and insert into the first incision another time an additional instrument, which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	 And place the edge of that sharp instrument against the flesh next to the vein, and the other edge into the bone, and use this to reach the urethral fissure, and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	 But let the incision continue until it reaches the vein, and then make this in the urethral fissure into another fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	 And after a quantity of blood has flowed out, squeeze the places of the frozen blood clots.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	 Then place in each incision a piece of old cotton cloth, and place on those poultices soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and see that it does not become an abscess cautiously.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	 And on the third day, remove the bandages and administer a large infusion of hot water or tea, and then treat it with an ointment made from basil, rose oil, and others until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	 Chapter V
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	 "On the care of tears through catharsis and the flow from the inner parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	 "When someone has sharp and persistent catharsis, and the eyes of the patient are sometimes exhausted to the point of being small, and their attention is weakened, and the eyelids have ulcers with hair loss, and there is a sharp pain in the front of the head with consequent outflow, then you should know that these substances and catharsis come from small veins originating from within.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	 "And the best cure for this is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in the middle of it, a small one in length (and begin with the left temple incision towards the right; and let the incision go into the bone; and extend your hand from the temples' sides which are good for chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	 "Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill between the two lips of the incision with old cloth or linen bandages.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 "And then secure it on top with powder mixed in wine and oil, so that it does not become a cautious abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	 This text seems to be describing the care for an ulcer or wound where pus (apostema) has already started to form and reduce. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Capitol .vi.	 Chapter VI
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	 Of the care of those who have cataracts in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	 Every cause that affects the ears is one of four kinds, for it can be a mineral substance such as stone or something similar to stone, like iron and glass, or it can be from a plant such as sesame or bean, or it can be a fluid substance such as water and vinegar or their likenesses, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	 Therefore, when a stone or another cause similar to those mentioned above affects the ear and does not fit or grow in the ear, place the ear toward the sun, and if you see the stone, then drip onto it some oil of violets or sesame, and administer the extraction of it, and make the person sneeze with condiments, and open the nostrils for the occurrence of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	 Then place around the edge of the ear some weights made of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to its original position above, because many times it has been expelled by these means.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if it is not expelled, then administer the extraction of it with an instrument called "gesti epicicarios subtil," which has this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	 And if it is forgotten with a gesture, good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a subtle ounce, repeated twice.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	 And if it is not forgotten by this means, then make a needle of iron and insert the end of the needle into the opening of the ear canal, and close around the needle with wax and softened oil so that only the needle remains open.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	 And then extract it from your body with strong force, as we have advised above.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	 But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take of hawk's fat or goose grease, with which birds are caught, a small quantity, and place that at the tip of a reed, and then wrap around that well-placed knot.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	 And then insert that into the ear canal easily, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	 And so if it is not forgotten by all the means we have mentioned, then cut off that part before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	 And the way to cut it is that you first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein and draw blood according to their strength, then make an incision between your fingers and turn the ear to the sides above, and then make a small slit in the edge of the ear towards where the pus is most pressing.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 And if the crack is of lunar shape until it reaches the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then close the crack at that moment with speed, and treat it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	 And if the cause of the problem in the ear is one of the greases that grow and swell, then administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not obey you upon examination, then take a thin spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	 And administer with that the removal of that grain which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	 And do not do this when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place a small weight on it, and then extract it with tweezers or a thin hook, or as we have said, because its removal is facilitated.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	 But in the case of water that has entered the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze at the beginning with conditions, and fill his ear with some old cotton, and pour over that ear in which there is water, and if by this means it is expelled, good; and if not, then take thin stones like pebbles according to the length of the finger, and heat them a little in the fire, and have the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear and jump over one foot from that side and strike with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	 The translation of "Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada" into English is:
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	 And already the water has been poured into a container from which you should take paper or cotton wool, and place one end of it in the ear, while extending the other end with fire until it is burned at its tip.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	 And then place another cotton wool and do this until all the water has been poured out, and press it with a probe as mentioned above for the stone-extracting pouch.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	 But in the case of an animal entering that ear, if it is a small creature, similar to a flea, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large creature that causes swelling inside the eardrum, then administer its removal with tweezers and scissors, and the cause of it will be lighter than all other cases that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	 But in the case of removing a worm born inside the ear, when you treat it with the water as mentioned in the division and the distillation treatment, and your cure does not succeed, then you must look at the ear in sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And so if any cause of the worms appears here, then remove it with tweezers or fine scissors; but if no cause appears, then take a probe that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which has this shape.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	 And insert the thin end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; then suck out with it strongly and do this many times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	 But if the patient does not comply with your request, then you should seal the end of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distilled remedies that the ancients have already proven effective for treating worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And let your infusion be the one with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, of which this is the shape of it:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	 And make that of silver or copper, very narrow, in which there is a small hole, and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	 And thus it should be packed with cotton so that it fits into the hollow of the cannula, which will be necessary here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	 And if you wish, take a reed and wrap its tip neatly with cotton, then put oil or the juice of some herb, or whatever medicine you choose from these into the cannula — which is in the ear —, and then insert the reed with the cotton on top and squeeze it gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the hollow of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	 And that which is inserted in the ear should be carefully scalded with a small amount of fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	 And be careful that the substance you distill into the ear is not too cold, for medications for the ear do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	 Chapter VII
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	 On the care of earaches.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	 Sometimes some children are born from their mothers' wombs unperforated, and this also happens in some men; an obstruction occurs in the meatus of the ear due to a disease or a piece of flesh stuck there. And this obstruction is sometimes located at the pore of the auditory canal which does not recognize its limits, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	 And that which occurs at the pore of it, which does not comprehend its limits, is in the greatest difficulty to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	 And in that which reaches the limit, it is necessary for you to place the ear of the patient towards the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And then if you see an apparent obstruction, open it with a fine probe which looks like this:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	 If the end of it, which has a narrow width, is such that one part is sharp and the other is not; and let the probe be two finger widths long, so as not to harm the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	 And so if the opilacio is due to flesh growing in the ear or in its meat, then take it with fine scissors and incise it vigorously until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	 And if the opilacio is in the bone of the ear, then take a fine iron needle and heat it slightly with fire, and then insert it into the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	 And so if you find opilacio with water that the patient finds easily, due to the heaviness of hearing, try to relieve his pressure gently; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then place in the ear cloth of the appropriate size according to the width of the hole which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or take some herb and dip it in vinegar, then pulverize it over the wound three times a day; and if you see the ear is already apostemated, then it is necessary that you remove the herb and replace it with another herb which you will wrap in wax made with rose oil until the apostema subsides; and then continue to treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	 "However, if bleeding occurs, then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the wound, and use another treatment that restricts blood flow, which is discussed in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	 Chapter VIII
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	 "On the care of sties that appear on the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	 "Sties that appear on the eyelids of the eyes are sometimes moist, and sometimes dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	 "Therefore, you should have those with tweezers or fingers, and cut them off at the root with scissors, and then place on the areas something sharp.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	 "But if pain with blood flow comes, then you should cauterize those with a subtle needle-like cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	 "And the best cauterization is near the incisions, because if they are cut several times and there remains any cause of their roots, then when cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	 Chapter IX
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	 "Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	 "Many times something appears in the eyelids of the eyes that is caused by a hard and tough substance, and because of its size it is called swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	 And it is an accumulation of thick fluid in the eyelids, both lower and upper.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	 Therefore, the operation on them is that you should consider if the swelling in them comes from what appears to be coming out of the eyelid and is moving to all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	 Therefore, cut along that swelling with a slit lengthwise, and then drain all parts of it easily until it becomes dry, and then suspend it with a thread and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 But if you are not able to start it, then just penetrate the eyelid with a small incision, little by little, and that should be sufficient for any reason.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And if the swelling is large, then you adjust it with a stitch; and care for it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	 And if it is small, you will not suffer any harm from that because the fluid of it heals that and cures it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 And if the swelling is extending into the inner parts of the eyelid, you should cut the inside surface, then lift the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a thread, or make another incision as needed, and press it from all sides. And if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, that will not matter for any reason.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	 And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and care for the area with water that penetrates until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	 Chapter .x.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	 Of the treatment of an abscess on the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	 An abscess is a growth that is generated in the layers of the eyelid above, and it is more common in children, causing their eyes to become inflamed and leading to cataracts in many cases; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears gather in their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	 And for this reason you see these children constantly squinting, and sleeping with their eyes squinted; and the humidity of their eyebrows on their eyelids has already caused inflammation, and the appearance of an impending abscess is evident in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel pus inside.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	 And there is some way of operation that if the patient places his head on your lap, and you place a cloth over him and make a ring around the area containing pus from all sides, and then press it firmly with your fingers so that the pus accumulates in the middle of the ring, then make an incision in the middle of that humidity with a spatula, cutting lengthwise, and the cut should not be larger than the cut made in bloodletting.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	 Here's a translation attempt for the given sentence:
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	 "Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped around the specified parts outside and turn between your right and left hands until it is discharged.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	 "And be careful not to press into the opening, so that with the spatula you do not reach the smell and cause it to escape.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	 "But if it does not appear to you immediately at the beginning of the opening, then press gently into the opening until it begins to appear; and then extract it as we have said; and then submerge cloths in water with vinegar and place them on the area, securing them with bandages.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	 "And also sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the opening, so that any remaining moisture is absorbed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "Then care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	 "But if a hot abscess occurs in that area, then treat it with cold poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	 On the Manner of Touching the Nose
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	 When hairs are born under the eyelids due to unnatural growth and have been there for some time, they irritate the eye and cause various ailments such as excessive tearing and softening of the eyelids, until it becomes a serious problem for the eye, which is called touching of the eye. It is treated in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or with acute medicine, as was said before in the chapter on cautery; or it is touched by incision and suture; or with needles, as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	 Based on the context and similarities with the provided translation, here's my line-by-line attempt at translating the given sentence:
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	 Certainly! Let's translate the given text line by line:
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	 And then open with the spatula over both lines that you have marked, and begin from the greater tear duct into the lesser tear duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	 And if your fissure is near the natural hairs, like the thickness of a king's hand.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	 Then place a hook in one of the two angles of the anus, and excise it completely, and then use the thread to join the two lips with honey or fine wool yarn, and clean the blood, and make adhere what exceeds from the threads on two eyebrows with some sticky substances, if you want to do this, otherwise don't worry about it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	 Then let the thread stitches dissolve within three or four days, and then heal that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	 And if you wish, let the wound heal without stitches, and treat it with something that dries and contracts, because the eyelid is lifted due to the closure of the wound and its accumulation; but stitching is better, therefore I say this as well, according to the old ways of treating.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	 However, be careful with the patient, and it is a good operation, and there should be no fear in this matter.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	 And there is another way of treating it, which is to mark on the eyelid a figure similar to a myrtle leaf, and then lift the eyelid with three hooks placed together and arranged in this manner:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then carefully close the two lips of the wound with stitches, and ensure that it is healed inside as well.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	 But if an abscess occurs, you should make an incision or a puncture in it; then seal the abscess with wax and similar substances, and apply ointments.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	 And sometimes it happens to the eyelid that its hairs turn inward, then you should use water on it for the incision as we said before; but stitches in each case are more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	 To treat with canes is done like this:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	 And it is that you turn the eyelid and cut the shape inside according to what I have said; then make two canes or two thin needles, the length of which should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be less than the width of a spoon.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	 And you have already made incisions at the ends of each partition where you place the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	 Then you add each one with delicacy above the water that overflows from the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the canes of each partition with strong force, and leave it for some days, because the cord through the constriction will die and become soft and will fall off by itself until it falls out on its own.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	 If it is delayed, then break the fast with the toads, and immediately treat the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	 Therefore, when it is healed, the eyelid is raised, and the hairs do not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	 And this is the way to make two reeds according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	 and let there be the amount of length and width, neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	 About removing stinging hairs from the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	 When the hairs are unnatural, hard, rough and stinging in the eyes, then the operation is that you take a fine needle and place it in that same thread of silk or linen, and immediately you should adjust the tips of it and insert them in a very subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	 And let the length of the threads be about one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	 And immediately you should weave another fine thread under it in a short time, and knot the tips of that one if you wish to do so.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	 And immediately make the patient sit in your chair, and let it be near the window so that your work may be seen clearly, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	 Based on the context and similarities to modern Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	 Here is a possible translation of the given sentence into English:
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	 Based on the pattern of the previous translations, here's my attempt at translating this line:
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	 Sure, let's translate that line by line:
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	 And you will see that with the eye of the wound, because then you will throw away the splint and the bandage, and each and every one will close their eyes, and leave the keys for two days or three, until the hair adheres to its place and good flesh grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	 And if the hair is too short, then you should attach a long natural hair to it and raise it with that, or leave it until it has lengthened to an appropriate amount of space, and then you can raise it.
Capitol .xiii.	 **Chapter XIII.**
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	 About the treatment for cataracts that appear on the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	 When cataracts appear in the eye and there is contraction of the eyelid when it contracts upward, or to the right or left side due to poor healing of a wound or cut or from cautery, this condition is called leporine cataract. This cataract, whether natural or accidental, is caused by poor healing of wounds or cuts or from cautery, or by similarity to their unfortunate state.  (The original text seems to be describing different causes for the same condition.)
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 The manner of operating on it is to cut through that scar tissue and separate the lips (of the wound), and place a wick of linen cloth between them, and tie them together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	 And it is not necessary that you use a cure for him due to the causes that dry out and constrain, because if you do this, it will return worse than ever before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	 Use one of the causes that soften, such as fenugreek, and soak it in water with altea and li seeds, or use an ointment made from dyacolon, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and immerse the cloth in it, and cure with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	 And the treasure of your cure is that you should pierce with all skill that which is not solidified according to the form as it was at first.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	 And this operation which we have mentioned is none other than the correction of alicrato that does not return to the form of the place as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	 Chapter XIV
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	 On the care of hecrato, which is made in the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	 This hecrato which is made in the lower eyelid, which is truly called hecrato; and it is either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	 But accidental is caused by a wound or a cut or by cautery or by other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	 And the way to perform this operation is that you take a needle with a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	 Then you extend the skin to the openings with the needle and sew it with the needle, and cut through with a broad blade.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	 And thus if the shape of the eyelid returns to its proper form, that is good; and if not, take the rod and place it on the split area, and with that turn the eyelid, and make two slits in the side of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	 And let the ends of the two slits be at two corners of the incision, which you have made so that they meet, and let them form an angle until, when they come together, they form a figure of their own.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	 And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	 Then remove that piece of skin by the width of the needle's tip below it, so that it becomes the eyelid.  (In this context, "ostar" means to cut away or remove.)
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	 Then join the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; then heal them with the water we mentioned for softening medicines and compresses until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	 And if elevation is necessary through an incision or suture or cautery, then you should make a flat incision on the eyelids following what has been mentioned before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	 And then separate with your thumb between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	 In summary of the discourse on elevation, whether above or below, let the operation proceed as prepared for the type of elevation, and that is in various forms.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	 And the skilled craftsman always prepares an engine in every possible way to restore the figure to its natural form or close to it, according to what is convenient for the patient with regard to the operation and instruments in the best arrangement.
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter XV
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	 Of the adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	 When this adhesion happens to some men so that the eyelid is stuck to the white of the eye and its movement and natural function are impeded, then it is necessary for you to insert the end of a reed under the eyelid and lift it up with it, or extend it with honey.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	 And then you should carefully incise the adhesion with a subtle spatula that is not sharp like a scalpel, but rather blunt with a slight edge to avoid disturbing the patient during the operation. Leave the spatula so it does not cut the skin with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	 And let your incision be so that it easily separates that adhesion until the eyelid returns to its natural form and all of the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	 And then you should put salt water in the eye with which you wash it; or distill on it some juniper dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	 And then separate the eyelid from the eye with some wool dipped in egg white, and place it on the eye. On the third day, use cauterizing treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter XVI
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	 Of the incision of a nail and of the excess flesh of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	 Know that there are two types of nails: either they are nervous, similar to thin dry bark; or they are not nervous, similar to white frozen moisture. When it affects the nail, it is forcibly taken with pincers and cut, and the pincers should not be inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	 E amb les dues espècies, no comencen fins que el làcrim major entra petit a petit i cobreix la vista, impedint-ne la llum i el moviment.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	 E la manera d'actuar en l'inici és que el malalt posi el seu cap en les teves mans, després obri els ulls i elevi la parpella amb la teva mà, i després reculli la ungla amb una petita quantitat de dobleció i estenqueu-la sobre les parts superiors.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	 I then take a needle and insert a horsehair or cowhair or similar, or strong thread, or double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with thread; and extend it over the upper parts, and peel off the skin of the nail which is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	 I seguiràs amb el fil a través del darrere del dit.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	 Després tallaràs el romanent a la base del làcrim amb un bisturí fi o tisores petites, i netejaràs la carn del làcrim natural per evitar que en l'iniciació no es produeixin llagrimes contínues.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And sometimes the nail is extended or protruding with a pincer, as we have said. Then it should be cleaned with a surgical blade of this form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	 And be careful not to touch the corneal membrane with the surgical blade, as this could cause a tear and result in a punctured pupil.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 Then insert into the eye a small amount of crushed salt or sieved chalk, and leave it there until the next day; then cleanse it with water until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	 And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert the needle into it, or if it is stuck in that way, then many times this type of nail can be cured with medicine and healed as I have recounted in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	 And if you wish to cut it [the nail], then you open the eye of the patient and take a subtle surgical blade of great sharpness, according to this form:
am subtilitat.	 with finesse.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	 And if it is seen that the nail is thin and twisted and caught in the corner of the eye, then drip into the eye some chalk dust or sieved chalk or crushed salt from your mouth, and close the eye until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	 And first perform the operation until all that belongs to him is removed, except if a contrary abscess is present in the eye, for then you leave it and initially treat the abscess until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	 And perform your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	 The prominence of the tear-producing flesh, if noticed in the eye causing great damage, should be suspended with an ounce; and cut a portion of it, but do not complete the cut to avoid cutting into the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	 And then apply to the tear duct rose oil and sage until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter XVII. 
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	 On the cutting of cataracts and on what is born from flesh adhered to the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	 Sometimes in the eyes of some people, red flesh is born and covers the pupil, or it adheres closely to the eyelids and tightly compresses the eyelids to their outer parts, resembling a row of balusters.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	 But the operation on it is that the patient places his head in your lap; and then you open the eyes of that person and collect all that flesh with suitable scissors, taking it with a forceps or tongs; and then cut the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the scissors, and be careful not to damage the eye during your operation. 
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	 And it should be your incision with which you cut those or with a spatula that we have mentioned in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which a splinter is collected according to what will come later in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 Therefore, when your incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then fill the wound with crushed salt or sprinkle in it powdered vitriol and similar substances from corrosive medicines, and place over the wound outwardly cotton soaked in egg white until it is secure against pus.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	 And if there remains any cause of guarding and the wound is secure from blood, and you fear pus, then leave the wound open and treat that pus with water that promotes the discharge of pus, and afterwards repeat the operation until it is healed. Similarly, do this for flesh that becomes attached in the wound of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	 However, you should ensure that all care of the fresh wound be done by natural means or accidental, working with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member is tolerating the operation.
Capitol .xviii.	 It seems like you are referring to the chapter or section number. "Capitol" is an archaic spelling of "chapter". So, "Capitol .xviii." would mean "Chapter XVIII" or "Chapter 18".
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	 This phrase seems to be discussing the collection of pus in a wound. Let's break it down:
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	 "Know that there are veins called 'testudo' located on the head, and by preventing them from performing their function, they cause blindness for several days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	 "Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider if the head in which there is blindness is strong and has no other ailment besides blindness. If that is the case, then collect the blindness.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	 "And it is that you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with a hook or two according to your judgment; and let that hook be of fine double silk according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	 "or so that two hooks gradually come together in one place according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	 "And then those veins should be tied with fine forces, gently and skillfully, and let the blood be drawn little by little until you see that the veins are removed from the head and rolled up.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	 "And be careful not to touch the head with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is at noon before the sun, and you are very steady in your operation so that you do not cut anything except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	 "And when you have finished, then drip clear oil or juice onto the head, so that with its sharpness it may corrode what was removed from the blindness.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 Here's the translation for the given text:
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	 And then repeat the same procedure until the patient is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	 And this is the shape of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter XIX
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	 Chapter XIX: On reducing arytenoid dislocations of the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	 When you treat arytenoid dislocations with a cautery or sharp medicine according to the previously mentioned procedure and it does not heal, do not cut into it but rather make incisions over the abscess until it is matured, and extract all the moisture that is in it and the pus, until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And once the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of this shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	 It is called a pointed head, made of iron, with a rounded head like this, which should be made pointed by filing or carefully sharpening (as shown in the following figure).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	 Place that [instrument] on the corrupt part of the bone, and then rotate it between your fingers, pressing gently until you know that all the corruption has been scraped off.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	 And do this several times, then restore the area with drying and styptic agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	 When the wound has healed and good flesh has grown there, and the body has been cleansed of infection and remains so for forty days without recurrence or pus formation and no further incident occurs, then you know that it is cured.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	 If not, then it is not healed but rather the opening should be reduced to the shape of the nose, and in this manner: you uncover with a saw or sharp medicine, and after uncovering the bone, you take thread in this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	 Let the tip of the thread be triangular, and let the shaft of it first be tapered into the extremity like this:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	 Then place that over the bone, and let it be close to the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little into the nostril, and then roll your hand with the thread until it penetrates all the bone, and the patient feels this because they find relief as soon as you remove your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	 Therefore, then restore the place with astringent medicines that dry it in this way:
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	 Therefore, when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter that flowed out to the parts returns to the nose, so it is lighter on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	 This appears to be the beginning of a chapter or section heading in a medieval medical treatise. The phrase "Capitol .xx." translates to "Chapter 20" in English. This indicates that what follows is the content of the twentieth chapter of the text.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	 This sentence likely refers to a medical procedure involving the reduction of a dislocated or displaced part of the body, specifically the hip (huel). Here's a line-by-line translation:
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	 When the swelling appears in its entirety and does not diminish or worsen during the treatment, then you should let the patient go, and then follow them, and then place ventozas on the neck without scarification and suck out well; and then apply liniment to the swelling which is made of acetum (vinegar), aloe, enses (honey?), and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the poultice on the swelling with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	 The method for the powders is to take many sheets of linen and fold each one into four layers, making many of them from these.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	 And then place those layers on top of each other according to the quantity that the swelling needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	 And then strengthen on top of those with a hard cloth with strong tightness; and repeat the ventozas with suction without scarification; and then remove the ventozas and let the swelling be tight day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	 But if during this time the ligament has softened, then it should be very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	 And then remove the ligament day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	 And if you see that the swelling has already been reduced, that is good; and if not, then repeat the poultice with the powders and the tightness and the ventozas until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	 **Capítulo 21.**
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	 **Sobre el comienzo de la prominencia del vítreo.**
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	 **Cuando ocurre una ruptura en el vítreo y se prominente y sobresale de los párpados como un grano de rábano, y la forma del hombre está distorsionada por esto, y deseas cortarlo, entonces la operación sobre él es así como hemos descrito: tú insertas la aguja en la raíz del vítreo desde abajo hacia arriba, y luego metes otra aguja desde el lado del lagrimal, que sea doble de la primera, e inserta aquella y deja la primera aguja según su disposición; entonces cortas el lugar del hilo doble y levantas con esto la parte del vítreo alrededor de la aguja, y fortaleces esa acción.**
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	 **Luego, retiras la aguja y colocas encima un algodón empapado en clara de huevo, y dejas que el hilo caiga con la parte del vítreo.**
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 **Luego, curas la herida con un ungüento que fortalezca hasta que la enfermedad se cure.**
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	 This sentence appears to describe a medical procedure involving the treatment of an eye issue. Let's break it down line by line:
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	 And soon he will be strengthened to heal.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter XXII
De curacio de alconati.	 On the treatment of cataracts.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	 This illness, which is called cataracts, is not simply watery fluid that descends into the eye like tears, but it is something else.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	 However, the way to deal with it is to have the patient sit on a straight and prepared chair, then take their head in both your hands from two sides, so that you can see the fluid coming out of the lower parts, and quickly dry it so that it does not descend further and block the light, and thus the patient will be able to see the causes as they are seen.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	 And if it does not come down, know that it is just water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	 But if the descent of the fluid is not prepared with water as we have said, then have the patient sit between your hands and quickly take a thin spatula and use it to scrape the membrane slightly below the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunica in the corner (where it should go), until the fluid is removed.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	 Therefore, once it is removed, then you should drip warm water into the eye, in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 And then heal with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	 Of the treatment of water descending from the belly.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	 We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which ones need to be punctured, as we have explained, according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	 Then you should make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie their belly tightly with a cord.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	 And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their belly, if the belly in which the water is located is on the left; or with your right hand, if it is on the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	 And then with your right hand take almonds, if the belly is on the left; or with your left hand, if it is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	 And then place the tip of an almond near the crown of the head through the thickness of the eyeball from the side of the tear duct, and then peel the almond with virtue and roll your hand with that.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	 And then penetrate into the eyeball of the belly and feel that the almond has already arrived at the desired place. 👉 Continue translating?
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	 And then pause for a moment; therefore, if the water has descended, then you should remove that other time before the wax is poured.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	 And so, when it is dry and does not descend, then you should extract the wax with ease, and roll it a little at a time in your hand, and then dissolve a little salt in water and with that wash the wound inside; and then place outside the wound cotton or linen soaked in rose oil and egg white, and moisten the wound with water.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	 But we and those of our time use powdered sugar mixed with egg white on it.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if your wax does not obey the inside of the wound due to its hardness—for there are some men whose wounds are very hard—then you should take the spatula which is called alabaster, and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	 And so pierce with it that place, and do not end your hand in the hole, but only make a subtle way for the wax to enter its location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	 Then introduce the wax as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	 And you must complete your work by preparing the patient's bedroom so that it is dark and quiet, and have him sleep on his back without moving.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	 And press on the patient's nature so that it may be softened and not move its head to the right or left of everything.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	 And let the bandage be according to his disposition within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	 And then release him from that dark and profound sight, make him see some causes, and then return the bandage within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	 And it is not necessary to do this during the hours of the cure or immediately after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	 It is necessary that you delay this because water can slightly change due to great and intense regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	 But if an abscess forms, then it is necessary to release the humors before seven days, and correct this with water that reduces the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	 Then you close the patient's sight and place on his face a golden plate so that his vision may be controlled for some days, leaving him in the most profound darkness.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	 And then he is gradually brought out of this darkness and returned to his normal state.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	 And know that in alchemy the student is not exempt from some vision tests, and then you shall be bold in performing the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	 And it has come to our attention from some of those who are at the Artach, and someone said that he made fire in the Magdam Ayrac, which is pierced with the tool used to draw water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	 But nevertheless I have not seen anyone in our land who has done this, nor have I read about it in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is something new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	 And these are the forms of the types of pumps, for the person who does not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	 And they are made of iron or steel, and their tips should be fashioned with this subtlety: triangular, with a sharp point, as is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	 Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	 On the treatment of flesh eaten away in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	 When in the nose there arise diverse growths of flesh, some of which have a cause similar to that of scorpion fish poison, or like a sea anemone; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles that fish.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	 And of it is cancerous flesh, white, of dark color; and of it is the lion's flesh, not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	 Based on the provided context and similarities to medieval medical texts in related languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	 The text seems to be a medieval medical instruction regarding the extraction of something from the body parts. Here is the line-by-line translation:
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	 The text seems to describe a medieval medical procedure involving the treatment of an abscess or boil (apostema) that is filled with blood or pus. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	 And then place a little vinegar or water in the nostrils.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	 But if the nose is open and moisture flows into the palate, then know that he has been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	 But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you should know that inside there is flesh rotting in the upper nasal bones which have not been reached by the incision.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	 Therefore, it is necessary to introduce fat into him, which has some thickness, and apply the fingers of your hands between each knuckle the amount of the said or less, and you instruct the patient and insert one end of the fat into the nose with the finger or with another tool that he can use.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	 And after he has done this, let him send his odorant into it until it reaches the nasal passages and comes out on his throat, for many times children do this in school, and it is an easy task for anyone who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	 And then place the two ends of the fat, one end coming out of the nose and the other remaining in the nose, and then administer a meat clamp with your fingers that are in the fat, and do this until you know that the flesh is already with the fingers of the fat.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	 And then extract the bile, and place in the nose near the blood vessel a clove, and do this for three days or more until the ointment completely dissolves everything that is rotten from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	 And then at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	 But if you decide on a drying treatment, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	 And this is the form of the instrument called an oil still, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	 And make it of silver or brass, which should be similar to a small open oil lamp, also like a small bowl, and the opening similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	 And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the oil still should be flat, open; at the end of which there is a handle with which you hold it when you pour into it oil or water that you want from the juices and the suckable causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	 And these purges are precious: take of castor bean pod, white heliotrope, ginger, saffron pistils, long pepper, cardamom, and a little anise seed - six ounces in all, mix with the juice of wheat and cabbage, and make them into pills; one pill should be dissolved in warm water and dropped into the nostrils of the patient lying down.
Capitol .xxv.	 Based on the provided text, it seems like the treatise is discussing medical procedures and conditions. The sentence "Capitol .xxv." appears to be indicating a chapter or section number in Roman numerals.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	 The text you've provided seems to be written in a language that is a blend of Old French, Spanish, and Latin. Let's break down the sentence and attempt a translation:
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	 Certainly! Let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	 And for this reason, you should note down everything at the beginning of their appearance, and write it all down.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	 Then place over the area either the cautery or the burning medicine that was in its place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	 But if your writing is delayed until it becomes inflamed, then consider whether it is hardened, tough, of dark color and has little sensation. Do not touch it with iron, for it is a cancerous abscess; many times it has been seen that whoever writes about this abscess experiences great harm upon the one whom they have written about.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	 And if the abscess is from a blow and not of dark color, and it is possible to write about everything, then evacuate the patient and write about it without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	 Of the stitching of the nose and lips and ear when their continuity has been dissolved by a wound or something similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	 Know that when the continuity of one of these cartilages is dissolved, little should be done in that operation except for some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Therefore, when it is necessary for someone due to some reason, consider if the wound is fresh with its blood, and then you should join the two lips of the wound with stitching, and afterwards treat it until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	 And if the lips of separation of continuity are already separated and each one is made whole, then it is necessary that you remove each part of its evident cord until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then join the two lips together with stitches and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder over them and let it dry, then place on the powder a thin plaster or any other of the consolidating plasters, and leave that ligature for two days or three, then remove it and replace it with another plaster and leave it until the sutures dissolve by themselves, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	 However, the manner of stitching is to add the separation of continuity with needles in the same way as we have mentioned in the stitching of the belly, or join the separation of continuity with thread in the way that you know how.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	 Of the causes that appear on the two lips in the inner parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	 It often happens to many men in the inner parts of their lips that certain hard masses similar to bird droppings appear, and some are smaller and others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	 Sure, let's translate the text step by step:
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	 On the incision of the flesh attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	 When the gum flesh is tight and has more than one vein attached to it, which the ancients called albulus, you should suspend it with a thread or scissors, cut it according to its course, and let the pus or blood flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	 Then place over the wound sage leaves or other styptic or drying powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	 And if that flesh returns, then cut it again and cauterize it, for after the cautery it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	 On the reason of teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	 When on the surface of the teeth, whether they are missing or protruding, and the gums are tightly attached with rough, sharp edges, and some veins are blackened and yellowed or greenish until the gum is corrupted by this, then the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	 And therefore you must make the patient sit between your hands and place their head in your lap, scrape the teeth on which those rough edges appear until there is no more cause for any of them, and this will remove the blackness and yellowing and the other discolorations until they are cleansed. ➤
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	 Sure, I'll attempt to translate the given medieval medical text line by line:
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	 And know that teeth require different shapes and many figures, according to the preparation of your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	 And because the razors with which the tooth is cut from inside are different from those used between the teeth in other forms, you should prepare these forms of razors, which you will see shortly.
Capitol .xxx.	 Chapter .xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	 On the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	 You should carefully remove the tooth from its pain with all effort and prepare thoroughly for its extraction, because there is no reason that justifies keeping it after extraction, since it is a sublime substance until it is removed.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	 But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be firmly certain which is the painful tooth, because often the pain deceives the patient and he thinks it is in a healthy tooth; if you extract that one, the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been removed. We have already seen this in the practice of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	 Therefore, since you must be certain which is the painful tooth and you know it well, then you should scarify around the tooth with a spatula that has some virtue in it, until it is dissolved from the gum on all sides, and afterwards, make use of your said tools or fine forceps little by little until you reach it.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	 And now proceed to talk strongly and clearly with the patient, using firm language, and place the patient's head between your thighs so that you can hold it securely without causing any discomfort. Then carefully extract the tooth in a manner that ensures you do not break it and cause no greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	 And therefore, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and place it beneath the patient in such a way that you facilitate and aid in its removal as was done at first.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	 However, if the tooth is fractured or decayed, then you should fill the cavity with cloth and tighten it using a fine thread so that it does not break during your constriction with forceps.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	 And it is necessary that you act carefully with incisions around the entire edge of the gum and be mindful of your strength so that you do not break it and leave a part attached to the patient, which would cause more pain than before.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	 And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and audacity regarding tooth extraction, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they cause great injuries on the patients which are more difficult to heal, and all or some of these reasons may happen: that you extract the tooth with some bones from the jaw, as many times we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	 And for the removal of it, wash the mouth with wine or vinegar with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	 And if there is bleeding through this, as with many wounds, then sprinkle some amount of dust and splash it on the wound. And if that does not work, use a cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	 The shape of the forceps and fine-tipped tongs with which the tooth is pulled at first should be of long handles and short, thick bodies, so that they are not bent when you must work with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	 And thus as is the case with thick handles until when tightened with those they are not bent, the ends should be short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	 And they should be made of Indian iron, straight and with long handles, and at the ends of those there should be teeth which fit into each other and are tightened by constriction, and sometimes the ends of those should be in the shape of a stork's beak, which is curved, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	 Of the removal of teeth and the extraction of the bones from locked jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	 When you need to remove a tooth that is broken for any reason, it is necessary that you place cotton with borax on the area for one day or two until the area is softened; and then insert pliers or tongs whose extremities resemble the beak of a bird called stork or heron, in the shape of forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	 Their extremities should be made inside like a file or rasping tool.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	 And if you cannot extract the tooth with these forceps or tongs, then it is necessary that you cut into the gum and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose form is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 And it should have a short handle, not too large, and not be sharp to avoid breaking.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	 So if with this the gum is pierced, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments whose forms are as follows: the form of the first instrument is that of a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	 The form of the second instrument should be that of a triangular and more slender extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	 And now you are helped with this instrument, having two prongs, whose form is approximately as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	 And with other instruments that will be used for tooth extraction; because assistance is provided with this instrument which resembles a large onion, and this is its shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 of the twisted or short triangular tip, which should be somewhat thick, and not beveled so that it is not blunt.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	 And know that the tooth extraction tools are similar to and as effective as other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	 But the skilled and subtle artisan in this craft finds for himself, according to what the operation and various diseases indicate to him; because there are diseases for which the ancients did not provide or name a specific instrument, due to the diverse forms of different species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	 But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is crushed or broken, then it should be fixed in its place with something suitable from the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned for tooth extraction. And help yourself with the following gesture, which has this form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	 And let it be of some small thickness, and let it be inserted or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or move until the bone is completely mended; and then restore the place with suitable medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "But if in the bone there is a small ulcer, then remove it along with its blackness, and treat it so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter 32
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	 On the care of prominent teeth over others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	 When teeth are prominent and do not follow their natural form, they can cause discomfort, especially in women and older individuals. Therefore, you should consider: if the tooth is close to another tooth, and it is not possible to extract or file it down, then cut it off; but if it is attached to another tooth, then use this instrument whose shape resembles a pig's snout, made of very sharp Indian iron.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	 And your incision should be done over the course of several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that none of the other teeth are cut as well.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if it is an exposed prominent tooth to filing, then file it with a file of very sharp Indian iron like this one:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	 And let all of it be made of Indian iron, and the handle evenly; and it should have many small points like a file with which needles are made. With this, the tooth should be filed little by little over many days gently, so that no other tooth is cut or damaged.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	 "And then clean it at the end, and shave it with some razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	 "And if it is a tooth of which one part is broken and the tongue touches it, then you should smooth that interior so that the roughness of that piece is removed and flattened, and filled in so that the tongue does not cut itself and the speech is not corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 "Chapter .33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	 "On restoring broken teeth with gold or silver fillings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	 "When teeth are broken or dislodged due to trauma or falling, and the patient cannot eat anything solid, and you have treated them with astringent medicines, but your treatment has not worked, then so that they do not fall out again, those which can be strengthened should be filled with gold, not silver; for silver turns black and becomes brittle after some days, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	 "And the filling should be of such thinness and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; and the method of making it is that you take the filling material and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and then you increase with two bends of the filling material between broken or multiple ones, until the material reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	 And then carefully insert the instrument into the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with skill and caution until it is not damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	 And use the string that you have reinforced to tie the sutures of the teeth so that they do not protrude.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	 And then cut the excess string with scissors or forceps and add them to each location discreetly, and turn them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that they do not injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	 And then leave it thus tied as is customary.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	 But if it becomes untied or broken, strengthen that or those with another string in such a way throughout the entire process.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	 And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, as you see these tied together:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	 And when it is done that the tooth or teeth return to their respective places and are regrown as we have advised, and they heal.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	 And only do this if you are a skilled and wise craftsman.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	 And sometimes it is appropriate to use a bone of a cow for this purpose, and it is made in the shape of a tooth and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves with that for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 Capitolul XXXIV
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	 Când inflamația limbii care vine în limbă, îți interzic să vorbești.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	 Această inflamație care vine sub limbă, unele ori este naturală și vine cu nașterea, alte ori este accidentală și se produce din cauza unei boli care a fost deja vindecată.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	 Operația constă în a introduce mâini pe bura pacientului, până ce ajungi la tavan gurii; apoi ridicați limba și aproape că arzi această inflamație nervoasă până când limba se va separa de tavanul gurii.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	 Dar dacă există și o duritate sau un nod, care este rezultatul unei boli îndepărtate, atunci tu trebuie să aplici ungere și să-l tai până când vei tăia inflamația și nodulul se va desface.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	 Fii atent să nu taieți țesuturile din piele și sângele nu curgă din acea tăietură.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	 Apoi spălă rănile tăieturii cu apă, vinagre sau apă clocotită; apoi pune un presupus sub limbă, care este o bucată de material pe care pacientul trebuie să-l țină sub limbă toată noaptea pentru a preveni reapariția inflamației.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	 But if there is a flow of blood, place crushed vitriol on the area; but if the blood comes out, then cauterize the area with an antiquated cautery that is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 And continue to treat with the other remedies until he is cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter .35
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	 About the removal of a swollen tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	 Sometimes, under the tongue, there is an abscess resembling a small grape that prevents the tongue from functioning naturally; and it grows rapidly until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	 And the procedure is to open the patient's mouth, sitting in front of a light source and observing the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	 And if you see it is dark or black in color, hard, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 And if it has turned white and contains fluid, then place your onion in it, and cut it with a sharp scalpel, cutting it from all sides; and if blood comes out during the operation, then place crushed zegi (a type of mineral) over it, which is vitriol, until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 And then return to your work until you have finished with him, until he has been washed with vinegar and salt; and care for him with the other remedy until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 **Capítulo XXXVI.** (or Chapter 36)
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	 **About the removal of pustules from both ears and those that are in the throat, as well as other pustules.**
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	 **When it happens in the throat, they are called glands because they resemble cotton; these come out and are named pustules. When you cure them with the water we mentioned earlier and they do not heal, then consider if the pustule is hard, dark in color, and has little feeling; then do not touch it with iron.**
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	 **And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron because of the blood flow; rather, let it be until it matures, and then either you will draw it out or it will break on its own.**
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	 **And if it is of white color, rounded, and the root is fine, then that is what needs to be incised.**
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	 **And the operation on it is what you should consider: before your operation, see if the pustule has already stopped hurting or if it has diminished somewhat; then let the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head be towards the east, and open his mouth, and a servant holding an instrument between his hands should press the patient's tongue down with a very noble instrument, the shape of which is as follows:**
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	 And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	 Therefore, when you press the tongue with it and the abscess is revealed to you, then place your instrument over it, take a needle and insert it into the opening, and draw out as much pus as you can from outside.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Also, if you draw some of the tunic [membrane] out, then proceed to cut it with an instrument that looks like this:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	 and it resembles forceps, but the tips of it are curved so that the orifice [opening] of one is in the middle of the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	 But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a spatula that looks like this: and it should be sharp on one side, and not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	 And after you have cut one tunic [membrane], proceed to cut the other in the same manner, and then the patient will heal from cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 But if there is a flow of blood, heal with water from the decoction of pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves, and similar to those for cauterizing until the bleeding is stopped, and then care for it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	 And sometimes it appears on the throat, at other times on the tonsils or both of these areas, and you should cut them according to what I have said in the incision of two apples equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	 And I have treated a woman with an abscess that had formed in her throat, which was black in color and caused little pain, but it had already closed her throat, causing the woman to breathe with great difficulty. I had already forbidden her from eating and drinking water, and she would have died within a day or two if I hadn't intervened.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	 And the abscess had swollen so much that it protruded from her throat through two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	 So I made an incision with the fistula and inserted one of its tips into one of the openings, and pulled it out, along with a large piece of pus. Then I incised that opening to understand the other opening better, and then I opened her mouth, pressed her tongue down, and inserted the tip of the fistula into the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	 And then I cut out a large piece of it, and only a little blood came out of it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	 Thus her throat was cleared, and she began to drink water immediately, and then ate food. I did not stop cutting from that abscess many times over a long period, and another abscess formed in its place, which I incised until it had grown longer than the original one.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	 Certainly! Let's translate the given text step by step:
Capitol .xxxvii.	 **Capítulo .xxxvii.** (Chapter 37)
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	 **Sobre la hinchazón del dedo cuando está inflamado.**
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	 **Cuando el dedo está hinchado y la hinchazón es larga, se llama perpendicular. Y si la hinchazón es más gruesa en la parte inferior y redonda, entonces se llama quiste.**
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	 **Pero cuando se cura con el remedio mencionado anteriormente y la hinchazón no desaparece, y cada vez que el quiste vuelve a aparecer y es delgado, entonces debes incisarlo para drenar el líquido. Y si la hinchazón es larga y tiene un color rojo oscuro o negro y no duele, entonces debes tener cuidado con la incisión, porque en ese caso hay peligro para el paciente.**
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	 **Y cuando veas que el líquido es blanco y largo según lo que he descrito, entonces haz que el paciente se siente y presione su lengua con el instrumento adecuado para darle forma, y luego coloca una aguja en la nueva abertura y tira hacia abajo. Luego, incisa con uno de los dos instrumentos mencionados anteriormente.**
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	 And it is important that you do not inject that substance unless it is appropriate for the patient's natural condition without addition, because if you inject too much, you will cause their speech to be impaired.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 And for the injection, use the substance we have recommended for injecting two grains, and ensure that it is healed afterwards.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 But if the patient is frightened by the injection, it is necessary to use cunning in his cauterization without fear, and the manner of cauterizing him is only with sharp water. And you should place the patient's head on your knee, then press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier, and immediately take some of the water we have discussed in the chapter on cauterization, and perform the procedure with that living cause, placing it neither too thick nor too thin, and with this fill the cavity of the instrument whose shape is as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	 The outer part of the cavity in which the medicine is placed should be concave like the bottom of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the palate. The patient should then move their tongue so that saliva or mucus flows from their mouth due to the action of the medicine, so that none of it runs down their throat and they do not swallow it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	 And then take the medicine with your hand, and press it onto the uvula for half an hour until you see it become blackened and numb from the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	 And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the tip of the reed. Dip the cotton in the medicine and insert the reed with the cotton into a hollow cane until the cotton adheres to the cane. Do this as many times as necessary until you achieve the desired effect of cauterizing the blister, then let it remain there so that it may dry and fall off in about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	 And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it. Then after cauterization, clean around the blister with cotton soaked in warm water and rinse the area with the water from the medicine. Wash it with cold water and treat it outside with an ointment and inside with poultices until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	 And this type of treatment is safer than cutting and takes longer to heal.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	 Sometimes the blister is healed with something that is more delicate than cauterization and incision, because it can be cured with sublimation in this manner: Take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, dried Arabian grapes, chamomile, broth of similar herbs, and mix all these things or some of them together in a pot. Soak them in vinegar and boil; and the pot should be well sealed with clay, and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, on which an instrument should be placed in this manner; it should be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	 And introduce the extremity into the patient's mouth until the vapor reaches the uvula above the soft palate, until the uvula becomes somewhat blurred.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	 And repeat this process on the other joints until they are dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of an abscess, because it will aggravate the abscess, and you should only do this if you have the consent of the patient's guardian.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	 But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and place a hen's egg at the end of it, so that the patient's mouth can be covered, for the eggshell prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	 And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Chapter .XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	 About the removal of thorns and water that stick to the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	 Many conditions can affect the throat or cause pain, such as thorns in the feet or other issues.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	 Therefore, you should remove the visible water or other substance that appears to be stuck in the throat. To do this, press the tongue with an instrument facing the sun, so that what is in the throat becomes clear to you.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	 And what is not apparent and remains hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you cause the patient to vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because quickly the associated cause will be expelled through vomiting; or if the patient swallows a piece of bread or a lettuce leaf or a piece of dry bread; or let them take a piece of dried sponge, dipped well in honey, and then have the patient swallow it, because when it reaches the place where there are thorns, they will be extracted.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	 And take an eel and dip it well in honey, and let it remain inside the mouth until it is drawn out by vomiting; or take a leek and place it in the patient's mouth, then draw it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	 But if they are not expelled by those causes which we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead in this manner:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	 And let it be as thick as a small ray, and on the end of it there should be a cavity which you can insert into his throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	 And have him lift his head upwards, and be careful that the contact with his throat bone does not cause injury or dislodge a bone or thorn, or that which the physician removes with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	 Sure, let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
Capitol .xxxix.	 Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	 Of the extraction of leeches attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	 When treating the leech with the water we mentioned in the division of care with medicines and not with cautery, consider first in the throat of the patient to the south, because you will press the tongue of the patient with the tool that we have recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	 Therefore, if you see the leech, extract it with a small hook or with fine tweezers gently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	 And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the leech dies and comes out of the throat) and let the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	 And then take a cup full of cold water and open the mouth of the patient into it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not swallow any of that water for any reason, and move the water with your hand for about an hour, because the leech as soon as it feels the water will bite.  (The text appears to be describing a method of inducing vomiting to remove the leech from the throat.)
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	 Certainly! Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	 Do this, so that it falls.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	 And another way to perform this operation with the fumigation is that you take a bowl in which there are burning coals and cover the bowl with a lid that has a hole in its center; place the extremity of the instrument in that hole. Then, perform the fumigation on top; have the patient place his mouth over the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation is not exhaled until you know that the fumigation has reached the blood-sucking part, because the blood-sucking part will fall immediately.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	 And if it does not fall, then you repeat the fumigation many times, and have the patient abstain from drinking, and eat salty food and vegetables, and do not drink water. It is necessary that with this treatment it will be expelled.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	 And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodletting from the gular is performed when it is visible; and it resembles tweezers as you see them, except that in it there is a certain curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	 which is placed in the gular, and the end of it resembles the beak of a stork, which is wide, in which there is an indentation made by a file, so that when you press any cause, that does not let it go.
Capitol .xl.	 It seems like you want me to guess what "Capitol .xl." means in English based on the given context. In medieval texts, "capitulum" or "capitol" often refers to a chapter. The number ".xl." is Roman numerals for 40. So, "Capitol .xl." likely means "Chapter 40".
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	 In which is the summary of the discourse on abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	 Abscesses are various species, of various kinds, according to the memory of them, each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	 And they are diverse in their perforation and incision by two methods, one of which is according to the species of abscesses themselves, and for what we conclude about the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	 And the second method is according to the places in which they occur in the body, for the abscess that occurs in the head is different from the abscess that occurs in the anus; and the abscess that occurs in a fleshy place is different from the abscess that occurs in a joint; and each has its judgment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	 And there are some abscesses that ought not to be opened except near the maturation of the pus in them or their completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	 Other abscesses ought to be opened when they are raw and not matured according to their nature, such as those near the joints, for an abscess which is near a joint has its being prolonged until that which is in its circumference can be emptied, and easily the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or it is near a principal member, and if you delay the opening of it until pus matures in the principal member; or it is near the anus, therefore open it not matured, but not raw, of incomplete digestion, except that which is near the anus, so that its content does not spread and extend to the internal parts of the anus, and a fistula is formed, or so that it is done at the end of it that it may not be healed. 	
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	 "But I want you to know when to perform the incision of the abscess, and that is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	 "And know that it is matured when there is a ceasing of pain and fever, and also the reduction of redness and pulse, and the sharpness of the abscess head, and the other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	 "And it is important that you know to perform the incision below the abscess and from where the pus comes out.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	 "And the incision should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the palms of the hands or soles of the feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the cords of the nerves, of the arteries; and, finally, in all places except those where there is a reflection; because in those that are reflected, use incision according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	 "But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave the incision until its digestion is confirmed according to the time we have mentioned; because if you perform the incision before that, the body of the pus and much filth will be prolonged, and greatly enlarge the lips of it and its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	 "However, some abscesses are perforated according to the thickness of the flesh or the body, depending on necessity, or according to what the member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	 "And it is necessary to administer a small perforation, and in large abscesses a large and wide perforation or many incisions, depending on the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	 "And there are other abscesses in which it is necessary to concave the scoop and cut into them, when they are made like bread and are ready to burst, as is done with cases of double pox and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	 "And of these are those that are incised with a three-angled section; and of these is the one in which it is incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf, as with the abscesses of the groin.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	 "And there are those in which a round incision and a lunar incision are administered, and similar ones to these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	 "However, when there is none like the superficial lion abscesses, you should perforate it with a superficial or flat perforation only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	 "And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you should perforate it but do not extract all the matter at once; having extracted a portion from it, close the abscess again on the same day, then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this gradually until it is fully drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	 And especially if the patient is of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in poor health, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the expulsion of blood, and the patient dies quickly, and you open them up.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	 Now be careful in this chapter and make your puncture where you will perform these operations; it is advisable to clean the wounds and consider if the wound of the abscess is small or a flat section, then administer some drops of lithium or ancient coto; and if the abscess is large and the punctures are many, then it is necessary that you place a cloth in each hole until they come out together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if in the abscess a piece of the intestine has been cut off or it is concave in that area, then it is necessary that you fill it with old coto or thread made from linen cloth, just as when you have drawn pans or rags, without moisture; and strengthen it until the third day; and then proceed to process it and heal it with water from the appropriate ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	 But if there is bleeding during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, in which you have soaked a linen cloth, and place it on the area of the blood flow many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	 If the bleeding persists, then it is necessary for you to administer a remedy and care, and use powders that have been recommended in many places of this book of ours and by division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	 But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is a place with many nerves, then it is necessary for you to infuse powder in wine and hot oil, and place them on the area.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 And if it is in the summer, and the places are fleshy, then it is necessary for you to place powders soaked in water or oil or in wine and oil, and do this until the third day, as we have said. Then it is necessary for you to open the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to it what is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	 And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses in general. But according to the way of distinction, I have already said how each type of abscess should be treated specifically by chapters.
Capitol .xli.	 Chapter 41
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	 Of the cutting of abscesses that occur in the back of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	 In the back of the head, there are small abscesses, and they are of a certain type of knot that contains tunic-like layers on their surface; and their kind is many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	 And they are filled with them, and among these are those that contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	 And among them are those that contain moisture similar to dust and resemble them; and among these are those that are stony and hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	 And in the section of all, and in the removal of these there is no fear, for their removal does not cause adverse effects.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	 And the operation in the section of these is that you probe them with an instrument whose shape is shown here, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	 Because if the contents are moisture, then cut this with a section according to its length in a superficial section as shown here:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	 And the section begins from the line of .B. to the line of .G. Then, when the moisture has been evacuated, you should scrape that part where it contains the moisture, and do not leave any of it at all, because if too much remains, it will return if any of it is left behind.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	 And then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment, if available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with it and leave it until another day, for with the fluid it will corrode all that remains of that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	 And then proceed to apply Egyptian ointment on that area, gently and thoroughly as needed, until you are confident that there is no longer any cause for concern regarding that skin layer; at that point, treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	 And if an abscess has fatty lumps, then you should incise it in this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	 by making a cut in the shape of a cross, and inserting scissors between the two lips of the incision and moving it from all sides, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	 But if your incision meets with difficulty, then do as I have first told you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	 Similarly, perform the incision and treatment of a calcified abscess as we have told you; an incision on a calcified abscess is easier because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	 Sometimes there are ulcers from these abscesses which are on the head in some men with whom there is no moisture; this is because I incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess like a hard, rough, white stone that could not be crushed. And if someone were to strike that, it would hurt them.  (Note: "le" is used for both masculine and feminine subjects in this text, so I have interpreted "cap" as "head" rather than "chief/boss", and "femna" as "woman". The phrase "am los quals de tot no es humiditat" could also be translated as "in whom there is not any moisture at all".)
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	 In the other types of abscesses that occur in the head and are not covered by this chapter, such as the abscesses that appear on the heads of children due to ear issues, all of these should be treated with surface incision.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	 And make the perforation of those [abscesses] in their lowest part, so that the body may be relieved of the poison in the lowest parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	 And then care for them with water that is appropriate for healing [the wounds].
Capitol .xlii.	 Chapter XLII
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	 On the incision of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	 These abscesses often appear in the neck, armpits, and groin areas; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body as well.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And those that occur in the neck, and many of which are generated between them, all scrofula of these is within its own proper membrane, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have mentioned.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	 There are many types of these scrofulas, for some are stony, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	 Certainly! Here's the line-by-line translation of the provided text:
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	 And it is more careful that the vein or nerve is not cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	 And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not cut you and disturb the patient, or cut something that is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from your operation, then place on the wound vitriol trisected or other powders that staunch the flow of blood, and tighten the wound, and let what is inside heal the acuteness of the abscess, soften the wound, and begin to putrefy.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	 When the blood has been cut.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	 Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	 And then inquire with your finger if there is any cause of other little scrofulous nodes, and if so, cut them and clean them out.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	 And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then you should not cut that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	 Before, it is necessary to lay that [scrofula] with a strong double fold and let it fall by itself without harming it.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	 And if you cut out that entire scrofula, then it is necessary for you to suture the two lips of the wound and sew immediately with sutures so that no superfluous matter remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	 But if you see that there is still superfluous matter due to the size of the scrofula, it is necessary for you to understand to cut away the root of that, and then extract it and apply a suture as has been said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And regarding those scrofulas that contain humidity, pierce them with a superficial puncture where you see the place of maturation, and place the puncture in such a way that the pus comes out from below the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	 And then apply an ointment and something similar to this, so that it corrodes whatever remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	 And then when you see the wound has been cleaned, you should cure it with regenerative flesh ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	 Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	 On the incision of the pustule caused by an abscess in the neck.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	 The ancients said that this incision should be made on the pustule, but we have not seen any man in our land who has done it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	 "And this is the record of their speech.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	 "But in men having sciatica, it is necessary to avoid the removal of the needle, because with this [method] no benefit can be obtained, since all the veins and major parts of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	 "But in those who have abscesses caught in the mouth or gullet or two ears, when the illness is not in the throat, it is necessary to use the section of needles to avoid the loss which is made by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	 "Therefore, when we want to do this, we should cut the needles with three or four small cuts between the circles of the needles, so that the cut is in the cartilage, not in the bone, and this place is suitable for cutting because it is lacking flesh and its blood vessels are close to each other."  (Note: The text seems to be referring to acupuncture or a similar practice)
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	 "And if the doctor is fearful, then he should extend the tongue with tweezers, and then slit the tongue until it reaches the windpipe, but avoid the blood vessels if any are found there.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	 "And then cut the ligaments as we have described; and it is indicated on the section of the windpipe for hoarseness, which is caused by this that is disrupted in him and by the absorption of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	 And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	 So when the hour has passed in which puncture is feared, add two lips of the wound together, and sew it up with just that alone without stitching through the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	 Then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	 And Abulcasis says that the summary of the speech which we have recounted is nothing but to see that some of these apostemas have already taken over the throat of the patient, and the patient has gone into death, and his breath has dried up, and some go to cut open the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the place of the wound for a little while, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 And for that reason he commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease was consumed; and its malice lasted three days; and then he commanded to sew up the wound, and care for it until it was healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	 And what I myself have seen is that a maid took a knife and stuck it in her own throat, and with that cut off a piece of the pulmonary vein. And I was called to his care, and found the woman as she died, and discovered the wound and found the blood coming from the wound was small.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	 "Therefore, I was informed that no vein or tendon had been cut, and the air was exiting from the wound, so I healed it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	 "And do not speak to the servant if you do not raise your voice, and after a few days she will return to her senses.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	 "Now I say that in the section of the epilepsy there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	 Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	 "On the incision of an abscess which occurs in the neck externally, and is called a hernia of the neck.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	 "This abscess named hernia of the neck is a large abscess according to the body's condition, and it is very common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	 "And there are two types: one is natural, the other accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	 "And the natural type is not difficult to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	 "And the accidental type is of two kinds: one resembles large knots, and the other resembles an abscess made by the obstruction of an artery, and in that case there is danger.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	 "And it should not be presumed to cut until it becomes small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	 "And you should examine it and investigate it as described above. If you find that it resembles large knots and is not attached to any veins, then cut it just like the knots, and extract it with water from the skin and bursa; but if not, then thoroughly explore its entire being, and afterwards heal the area with the prescribed water until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	 Chapter Forty-Five.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	 About the Section of Various Knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	 There are many kinds of knots, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	 And it is appropriate that I now explain the difference between a knot and a tangle, as there may be confusion.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	 So I say that in a tangle there is heat and fever and intense pain until the ebullition of the excess fluid subsides; and it is complete putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	 But in a knot there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and I will tell you the story of Leon who had one properly.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	 And it depends on the color of the body, and its beginning is like a swelling, and it is made thus as if by an abscess, whether large or small, and they are of two types: either they are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a knot, first probe it and examine it at its beginning with the instrument that is called an introducer, as will be described in the following chapter.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	 And this is the way to investigate apostemes and all nodes; you must take this instrument and insert it into the moistest part of the node that you find in the apostema, and you should turn it slowly with it until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	 And then measure your hand according to the size of the node, and then extract the instrument and observe what has been left behind in its place.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	 And if the current moisture has been forgotten, of any color it may be, then you should make a shallow incision, as I have said for other nodes.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	 And if there is no moisture from the trace of the instrument, then you know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	 Dry it over it with a dry cloth in the shape of a cross like this:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	 As you have been taught, and suspend that with a hook, and peel off the skin from all sides easily, and keep the skin or bag, if possible, over it and extract that pus with the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	 But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and in many cases this happens, and then you should extract it piece by piece until nothing remains of it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	 Because if any cause remains with him, little or too much, the knot should return according to the greatest.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And if you see that any small part remains with him, then complete the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, tighten the wound, place a cautery over it to induce an abscess, and treat it with other treatments until he is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	 And if the knot is large, then sew up both lips and treat him with a flesh-eating ointment.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	 But if the vein is pulsating towards him, or non-pulsating, then you should cut and fill the area with powdered vitriol and leave it closed for two days or three until the wound softens and the blood boil subsides; then return to divide what remains of the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	 Chapter 46
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	 About the shapes of the instruments necessary for incision and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	 The forms of these instruments are of three types: one is large, the other is medium, and the third is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	 The form of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	 The form of the medium-sized instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	 The form of making small incisions is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	 They should be made of iron, steel, or clean razors, so that the incision is made quickly in the designated areas.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	 And these are the forms of experience, and they are named lancet and one of them is called bistoury.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	 And there are three types: large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	 The form of the large experience is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	 The form of the medium experience is this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	 The form of the small experience is this:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	 So that they may be used for those openings and exits, and fissures and abscesses, because these are due to the bones or other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	 And they are made round, thick, smooth, like large needles with which the shoes are sewn, and they are made of citrus wood, or reed, or iron, or silver, and the best ones are when they are made of citrus wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	 And the experiences are made of black feathers, which have been arranged so that with them the fissures may be opened in the cavity where the reflections are, so that they may be reflected with their lightness to those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	 Based on the context and the pattern of the provided translation, here's a possible line-by-line translation:
Forma del experient gran de plom:	 This seems to be a medical instructional text discussing treatments for various ailments. The sentence you provided can be translated as follows:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	 **Translation:**
Forma del experient petit de plom:	 The translation for "Forma del experient petit de plom" is likely to be:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	 The forms of the onyx are made from different species because some of them are simple and have only one curve, while others are made of three species: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	 And they are onyx stones, and they come in three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 And of those onyx stones, there are some that have two curves, and they come in three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 And some have three curves, and there are three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	 And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	 Form of a large, simple onyx stone, its form is:
Forma de unci simple migier:	 Form of a medium-sized simple onyx stone:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	 Form of a small simple onyx stone, its form is:
Forma de unci orp gran:	 Form of a large onyx stone with three curves:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	 Form of a medium-sized onyx stone with three curves, its form is:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	 Form of a small onyx stone with three curves, its form is:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	 Form of a large onyx stone with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	 Form of a medium-sized onyx stone with two curves:  (Note: The text has "curvatas" which seems to be a typo, it should be "curvaturas" to match the pattern from previous lines)
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	 Form of a small onyx stone with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	 Form of a large onyx stone with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	 Based on the context and similarity to medieval medical terminology, here's a possible translation for the given line:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	 Form of ointment has three parts or components:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	 And these are the forms of scalpels with which nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and there are three types: large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	 Form of large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	 Form of the medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	 Form of the small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	 The tips of these [scalpels] with which incisions are made are sharp, and the other tips are not sharp. They are not positioned in such a way that it may cause fear of cutting a vein or nerve during the scraping of nodes, so that the patient is healed and finds some relief due to the heat caused by the excoriation of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	 And these are the forms of cupping glasses, and there are three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	 The form of the large cupping glass:
Forma de magda migier:	 Form of the medium-sized cupping glass:
Forma de magda pauc:	 Form of the small cupping glass:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	 They are made of glass and resemble a ray with which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	 And there is a hidden point at the edge, and on that it goes inwards and outwards when you want, as you see fit.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	 Sure, let's translate this line by line:
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	 And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	 And these are the forms of those: The forms of ulcers with which blood flow is stopped, and there are three types: large, medium, and small; their forms:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	 Are made of brass, round with some length, and are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	 And you should have these types of cupping glasses - large, medium and small - so that through them you can quickly stop the flow of blood when necessary, and then it is not primarily medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	 However, do not use them to stop blood in any part of the body, and use them only on fleshy places, such as on the thighs and buttocks, and on the arms, breasts, belly and knees, and similar fleshy places like those.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	 And sometimes other small instruments similar to fleabites are made from those tools, according to this form; through which blood is stopped when performed by phlebotomy or for incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	 And sometimes they are made round in this way:
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	 About the care of male nipples that are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	 Sometimes the nipples of certain men become swollen as they begin to sleep, and then the nipples are also swollen, similar to the nipples of women, and are often lactating.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And to that person who has this condition, it is necessary to incise those with a lunar section in this manner, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then completely remove all the groin tissue. Afterwards, fill the wound with medicinal red ointment, and then suture the two lips of the wound closed, and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 However, if the nipple inclines towards the softened parts as it should in women, then it must be cut into two halves above, with two sections similar to a lunar shape, each of which is contained within the other at its end, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from the line of .B. and the line of .G. Then remove all the skin that is between the two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about the suturing and powders that are necessary for the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of blood, then fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it there until it dissolves what is fleshy, and then treat that which remains healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	 Chapter .48
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	 About the piercing of abscesses that come from the tonsils.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	 These abscesses that come from the tonsils are of the species of scrofula, hard, which contain a pus that is black.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	 And of these, some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when everything is evacuated from the abscess by pus, then fill it with old cotton and leave it until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	 And then remove the cotton and treat it with suitable ointment for that, until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	 And if the abscess is of the type of lymph nodes and scrofula, then cut it open as we said in the section on scrofula equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	 If the wound is spread in such a way that it can cause gangrene, then administer to them cautery as we have said before.
Capitol .xlix.	 Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	 Of the incision of abscesses that occur due to archery or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	 When a bowstring is broken and the cord above it has healed, then swollen abscesses often occur. And the signs by which inflammation and abscess are known to be caused by an artery or vein: for when an abscess is due to archery, it is long drawn out in the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a grating sound in it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	 And that which is caused by a vein is round and apparent on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	 Incision on this abscess is dangerous, especially in those below the ribs, in the groin, in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very great, therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is at the extremities or at the head should be evaded.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	 But on that which is caused by the inflammation of the opening of an artery, make a long incision in the cord; and afterwards widen the incision with hooks near the artery, and free it from the tunics until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	 And then I place the needle on that [area] and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the bowstring with double threads in two places — which causes me to show you an extraction of two bowstrings that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	 And then I puncture the area between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood drains out, and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 And then I administer a treatment in which powder is introduced until the ligaments fall; and then I treat that with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	 And if the abscess is caused by a cut vein, then you must hold water as close to the abscess as possible with your hand, and then insert the needle under the area where you held the water, making it penetrate; and in that double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then bind the abscess tightly as I have told you in the binding of the grape with two parts and two ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	 But if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert the thread with that needle through all of the abscess from the initial insertion of the first needle, and tighten those threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	 Let's translate the given sentence step by step:
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then place upon the pillow, which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the cure, which is made with egg whites and ointments until they are healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	 Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to a twisted nerve.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	 Thus, as an abscess occurs in the bowels and veins, so too does it occur in the nerves when it happens due to their compression or occurs from excessive labor or similar causes.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	 And the main cause of it is in the places of the tendons or the ankle, or in any place where the joints are weak.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	 And it is a severe abscess, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and its position is without pain, and when it is narrow with intensity, the patient feels something like a stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	 And it is not an abscess located in the front of the body, and for this reason, it is left alone, and it is weakened on all sides and does not go towards the front or back parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	 Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not necessary to be filled with iron, because quickly afterwards there will be a contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	 "However, if it is in the head or forehead, use a spatula with the hook.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	 "But if the abscess is small, then use scissors and carefully cut it open.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "And if it is large, then suspend it with threads, and carefully remove it; and then close the wound with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	 "Chapter 1
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	 "About the incision of an abscess which occurs in the same way as it does in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	 "There are many people who have seen in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies certain things which are called fungi because they resemble mushrooms; their nature is subtle and their head is large; and already their lips have turned, and it is one of those that is small, and it is one of those that is very remarkable.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	 "And I have seen one, and in his belly there were two things which resembled mushrooms even more closely, and there was no difference between those white ones, of very small nature.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	 "And already the lips of those were turned outward and split open, and moisture flowed from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	 Therefore, I examined them and found one with eighteen needles in the feet and the other with six needles in the feet.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	 And the operation in their examination is that you should consider if the patient is moist and the color of the area is white, moist, and of subtle reason; then you should examine them with a spatula, and there should be cauteries in your presence, because many times the drying out of it will expel much blood; and if you see blood, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	 And if you see the patient weak and fearful, beware of examining with iron; rather take freshly made lead filings, and strengthen that area in the manner we have said; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	 And then adjust the tightness of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease strengthening the large lead in the area until it is cut and falls by itself without effort.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	 But if the area is of a large size, then in its examination there is some cause for fear and dread, especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	 But it is possible that you cut most of it, and then cauterize that area so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	 And then care for him until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	 And beware that you do not presume to cut one that is dark in color, with little feeling, and slow movement, for that is also like cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	 And I will come to remember this regarding cancer as well.
Capitol .lii.	 Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	 Of the treatment of swelling of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	 Swelling of the navel is caused by various things; either by fissures in the intestine that lies over the stomach, and from it issues the gut or bowel according to what happens in other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or artery as mentioned before, or by trapped wind.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	 But if it is by a fissure in the intestine and issuance of the gut, then the color of the swelling is similar to that of the body; and it is without pain, and appears in various places.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	 And if it is by the issuing of the bowel, then its appearance with that which we have mentioned is of greater variety, and when you press on it as said before, it becomes hidden, and then returns; and it is very light to touch, and a great deal of water and vigorous work make it worse.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	 "But if due to moisture, it is swollen and not hidden when pressed with your hand, nor is it compressed, nor is it hard.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	 "And if it is due to blood, then you will see the abscess appear with blackish discoloration.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	 "But if it is due to flesh-eating disease, then the abscess will be serious, large, and hard, and it will be fixed in a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	 "But if it is due to flatulence, then touching it will cause swelling.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	 "And the operation on it is that you should consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an arrow or vein, or due to flatulence; then you must be prohibited from treating it, because in such cases there is fear and danger as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about abscesses caused by arrows and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	 "And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or hernia, then you should command the patient to hold his breath and remain extended; then show with your finger around the entire navel, and then command him to stay between your hands on his belly; then encircle with linen cloth around the navel over the area that you have shown with your finger; then extend most of the abscess above with a large hook; then bind it around with strong thread or silk and in the manner of binding appropriately.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	 And then cut the middle of the abscess that has extended onto the bandage and insert your finger into that hole; and if you have found and secured it with the bandage, then extract carefully and push the intestine back to its original place within the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	 And if you have found the hernia, then take it with a hook; and cut off its excess parts.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	 But if it is contrary to your bowel or vein, then go around that area, and then return to your operation. Take two needles and insert two strong threads into them, and insert the needles into the circle you made around the abscess in the shape of a cross, making sure they penetrate; then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area open so that the extended flesh can dry out and fall off on its own; or cut it away when it has thinned and dried, and then treat it with water from appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	 And if the protrusion of the navel is not fleshy or due to moisture, then you should treat the abscess as we have said and remove the pus or moisture found in it, and then treat it with appropriate water to solidify the area.
Capitol .liii.	 The phrase "Capitol .liii." translates to "Chapter 53" in English. This appears to be an indication of the section or chapter number within the medieval medical treatise.
De curacio de cranc.	 "De curacio de cranc." translates to "On the treatment of cancer" in English. This phrase indicates that the subsequent text will discuss methods and remedies for treating cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	 "Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu." translates to "We have already said, in the division, about the type of cancer and the manner in which it is subject to treatment with medicines, and that iron is an avoider in its treatment so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said about the main and cautious aspects of its treatment." This passage discusses various aspects related to the treatment of cancer using medicines and the precautions involved.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	 "E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit." translates to "And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, such as in the breast or groin and similar areas of the body, with the intention of removing all of it, especially when it is beginning small." This passage discusses the views of ancient medical practitioners on treating cancer, emphasizing that early intervention can be effective.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	 And then prepare the patient with the preparation in which they will be located for the operation, and also provide in the opening the tools that are necessary for this purpose; and then clean thoroughly from all sides with a good scrubbing until there is no remaining cause of his disease.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	 And let the blood flow, and do not stop it too quickly, and press on the areas, and clean off all the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument suitable for this purpose from among your instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 But if there is too much thick blood from a vein or an artery, then cauterize it until the flow of blood has stopped, and then care for it with the other care until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	 Chapter .4
De curacio de ydropici.	 Of the care for those suffering from dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	 We have already mentioned, in the division, of the types of dropsy caused by water and the signs of each type, and the care for them with medicine.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	 And that which is cured with iron is only the type of ascites alone, and it should not be approached with iron in the case of tympanites or hydrothorax, because that is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	 And when you have treated this kind of dropsy with medicines and do not find your treatment effective, then consider that if the patient is already weakened by another illness or another type of dropsy, such as a cough or abdominal pain similar to these, then beware not to treat them with iron, because there is danger in doing so.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	 However, if you see that the patient is full of vigor and has no other illness besides dropsy alone, and is neither a child nor an old person, then the manner of treating him is for you to lift the patient with your hands, and then immediately press his belly with your hand, drawing out the water from the lower part near the navel, and then take a thorn-shaped spatula like this:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	 that is two long pointed parts, with a pointed tip like a spatula; but however, it should have some slight narrowing at the end, so that in the operation you do not enter into the intestine and cause harm.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	 And then consider if the dropsy is caused by the intestines, because then it is necessary for you to make an incision along the navel for three finger widths toward the lower parts, on the right side of the navel.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	 "But if the swelling of the edematous (hydropic) is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	 "And if the swelling is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	 "And it is not necessary that your incision be on the side where the patient wishes to have it, so that the excess fluids do not flow freely to that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	 "Then pierce the entire intestine with the instrument and insert it into that incision. Raise your hand with the spatula between the intestine and the abdominal wall, and cut away whatever excess there is; if it's about the size of a fingernail or so.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	 "Then pierce the abdominal wall until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the water (fluid) is located.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "And then extract that (fluid) and insert an instrument of this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	 "It is similar to a thin silver tube; it is made of silver, iron, or pewter, and at the lower end there is a small opening. On the sides, there are three openings: two on one side and one on the other side; and its tip is curved like a feather quill, as you see:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	 And at the top of the patient's foot is a bandage, because when the instrument reaches the water, they should immediately place it on the instrument, so that in an instant, a large amount of water is evacuated, because if you evacuate more than necessary in an hour, the patient will die very quickly due to the dissolution of their animal spirit, or you will cause five-finger death, which is close to mortality.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	 "But evacuate according to the amount of virtue within the patient, and according to what the pulse's disposition indicates to you about the patient's virtue and their overall condition.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	 "Then extract the instrument, and hold the water that is causing [the problem], because it will be retained by the tube that draws from the vessel which you have been told to pierce in this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	 "Then repeat the instrument on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of water each time, doing this for several days, but be careful not to leave too much water inside.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	 "But if you fear for the patient and there is a large amount of water left, then treat that with a burial in hot sand, immerse it in baths, expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with desiccating medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	 "And cauterize on the stomach and the spleen near the extraction site of the water, as I have already mentioned in what has been said before.
Capitol .lv.	 "Chapter 51
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	 "On the treatment of children born with imperforate urinary openings.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	 Some times some children are born from the womb of their mother and their head's fontanel is not open (or it is narrow or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	 Therefore, one must pierce with a needle as soon as the child is born using a very thin spatula like this:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	 And immediately place a fine lead needle in the hole and tie it, and keep it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	 And when he wants to urinate, remove it and let him urinate; then immediately replace it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	 And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which passes over the area will not close this hole.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	 But that whose hole is narrow should be treated with a lead needle, as we have said, for many days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	 But those in whom the hole is not in its place are called hypospadias, which means that in these cases, the one who is born has the end of the penis at the bottom of the glans, so he cannot urinate straight ahead until he raises his penis upwards with his hand; and it is not good for him to have intercourse, because the semen cannot reach the woman directly, and this is a very bad condition.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	 Based on the context provided and the similarity to medieval medical treatises, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	 And be careful that in your operation to stop the bleeding, because this happens many times; and place yourself near the patient with something to stop the blood flow, and care for the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	 Chapter 56.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	 About the swelling that occurs in the foreskin at the tip of the penis, and about the darkening and blackening and adhesion of the foreskin to the tip of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	 Many times this swelling occurs in the penis and is called an excess of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	 And one [type] is malignant, while the other is benign.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	 Benign [swelling], you should suspend it with a fine thread and cut off the excess until it is completely removed; then place over it a bandage soaked in Egyptian ointment; and then cure it with ointment of white lead until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	 And if the swelling is malignant and dark in color, then you should apply a cautery near its base and root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	 However, if the swelling is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the swelling is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you should remove the inside portion at first until it is consolidated; and then cure the outside part, because when you cure both parts together with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not become narrow. ️
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	 And already there is blackening and corruption in the genitals and the foreskin; then it is necessary for you to cut out everything that has turned black and that tends to become corrupt or has already become corrupted; and then line over that place with honey, which is mixed with finely ground peel of pomegranate and sieved and sifted barley.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	 And then cure it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	 But if there is bleeding, then administer a lunar cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	 for the cautery is beneficial for two reasons at once, that is, to stop bleeding and to treat the wound when it is corrupting.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	 And if the head of the penis is rotten and completely destroyed at that moment, then it is necessary for you to insert a lead tube into the opening of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	 In the adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those whose foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required for them; and when it occurs due to a wound or an abscess) it is necessary that you separate it with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely released.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	 And if it is difficult to discern those accurately, then you should cut with a spatula part of the head of the penis and the foreskin, because the foreskin, when it is delicate, is very easily perforated due to its delicacy.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	 And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a fine thread, which has already been soaked in cold water to prevent them from sticking together again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	 And then it should be treated with six styptic powders until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	 Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	 On the cleansing of children and the care of those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	 Circumcision is not like the other diseases, but because it is our operation and under our control, and since children are most affected by this condition, it is necessary that we assign to it the best method of operation and the easiest way for them to heal.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	 Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired this practice through experience. That is why I have found that most artisans and barbers use circumcision and cleansing with a razor and tweezers; they use a ligature with thread and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	 And with the purification that is done with alphecati, and which is digital, used by cobblers, the foreskin of the male member is not secured, because it enters easily into its opening.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	 But in the operation with a nail, be careful not to hit bone and spoil your work.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	 And the child's foreskin is naturally short, and many times it is in such a manner that there is no need for purification, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	 But of the purification that is done with scissors and ligatures with thread, the goodness, experiment has revealed to me, because the scissors are of proportional incision, for this reason, the sharpness on top is just as much as the sharpness underneath; and therefore when you press your hand so proportionally between the two sharp edges, and cut accordingly in one go; and it is made a compression with thread in a figure containing the foreskin of the penis from all parts, with which no error can be found.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	 And the first way to perform the operation is that you make the child stand up if he is one of those who understands a little, so that you only tie the thread around his penis and leave him alone until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	 "And then proceed in that manner which is possible for you to assist and support their understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	 "And then prepare yourself by standing between their legs, and make sure not to be clumsy; hide the scissors in your hand or behind your leg, so that the child does not see those or any other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	 "And then insert your hand into their penis and blow into the urethra, and pull it out until the head of the penis is exited, and then clean it from any accumulated filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	 "And then tie the marked area with double thread, and then tie another smaller knot below that one, and then use your thumb to push it under the first knot with good tension, and incise between the two knots.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	 "And then gently lift the urethra and extract the head of the penis; and then let the blood flow out little by little, as it is better; and place powder on top and on the powder place a cloth in which is spread honey mixed with rose oil; and leave that on until the next day; and cure it with care until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	 The form of the forceps for amputation is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	 The fingertips should be blunt and the other tips should be sharp, so that the nail does not extend beyond the tip of the forceps. The length of both handles should be equal to the width of two thumbnails.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	 However, the mistake in amputation is that if you cut too high, you must remove the entire tendon or a part of it.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	 Therefore, it is necessary that you stretch the tendon with your thumb before the incision at the site and cut it according to its thickness.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	 And if you cannot grasp it with your thumb, then pull it out with a hook and cut it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	 But if three days have passed and there is still swelling beneath the skin at the site of the incision, then leave it alone until the swelling has subsided, and carefully peel away the scab, and cut according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	 And be careful not to cut off the tip of the finger, for that will not grow back.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	 And therefore treat it with something to heal the wound, using the powders that we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	 Based on the context provided, here's my attempt at translating and interpreting the given sentence:
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	 And take special care of him with that which we have mentioned until he is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	 Chapter 58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	 On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	 Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction from stones or congealed blood, or from a polyp or tumor, and it appears to be similar to what we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	 And if the urine is not dissolved and the retention is due to a stone that has already entered the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	 Then place the feet of the patient on his back and stretch his belly from below his back, and have the patient squeeze his thighs as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	 Then the neck of the bladder is constricted and the stone is expelled towards the back, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	 And if it is not dissolved with the water we have mentioned and the cause is strong on the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction from him with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and very thin, like a goose quill, and as long as a hand span and a half, at the end of which there should be a thin cane.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	 And make the patient lie down on a blanket, and pierce their bladder and penis with damp cloths, olive oil, and rose water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	 And then insert the tube with ease until it reaches the tip of the penis; then fold the penis back towards the navel; then push the tube into that; and then push that until it reaches the bladder, so that the patient knows when he is empty, and this is not done in this order, but in the meat where it goes crooked.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	 And then gradually draw out the fluid with wool, because the urine will soak the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	 Then extract that and use it as a treatment for urine retention, using a tube, do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	 Chapter 59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	 On the quality of enema for the bladder with clyster syringes and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When there is an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood, or a constriction of pus, and you want to distill water and medicines into it, then this should be done with an instrument called a clyster syringe, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	 "If the extremity of the patient is numb, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	 And there are three openings: two on one side, as you see.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	 At the beginning is a concave opening, within which lies what has been peeled away. According to the quantity with which it overflows, without addition, until some cause pulls it out from its humidity, it is pulled out; and when it is expelled, with this it is pulled out; and when it is expelled long, according to how much it makes a sound like clampcedra with which naphtha is used in sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	 Therefore, when you want to prohibit the moisture in the bladder, insert the end of the clapcedra into the moisture, and draw with it the water that has been peeled off from above, because the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clapcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	 Then insert the end of the clapcedra into the penis as we have mentioned in the chapter on circumcision; and immediately draw out the moisture with it, because that moisture reaches the bladder soon, and the patient feels this.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	 The form of a subtle crystalline substance with which the bladder is crystallized, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	 And whether it is made of silver or lead, its tip should be similar to a small feather, and then you insert it gently.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	 Then take a pig's bladder and place in it the moisture you want to crystallize, then tie it tightly with a double thread between two strong ligatures, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	 Then insert the end of the crystal into the wound.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	 Then press your hand firmly on the bladder with the moisture, and hold it in place until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	 But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and perforate it all around its circumference; and then insert a strong thread through those holes, so that they are reversed; and then fill the circle as if it were a bag, because you place in it the water or oils and other liquids that you want.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	 Then tie it to the instrument and use it in the same way as you did with the bladder, and press with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	 Chapter 60
De extraccio de peyra.	 On the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	 We have already explained in the division the species of stones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of the latter.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	 And we have mentioned the stone on which surgical operation with the hand and section is performed.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	 And the stone generated in the bladder specifically is that which is placed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	 And I will now relate this with a clear explanation and summary.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	 Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder mainly affects children; and one of its signs is that the urine expelled from the bladder is very watery in its subtlety, and sand appears in it; and the patient frequently urinates, and many times with pain, and is also constipated; and there are frequent pains in their buttocks. ghai
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	 And the healing of children from this is easier before they reach fourteen years of age, and it is a difficult treatment for the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	 However, among the young, it can be healed by this method.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	 And of that for which the stone is larger and the cure is easier; and if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	 Therefore, when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of this process to cleanse the patient with a clyster that extracts all the wind from his intestines; because sometimes this wind prevents the expulsion of the stone due to its investigation.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	 And then the patient should be taken by his feet and shaken and moved in this way to make the stone descend into the bottom of the bladder or sometimes move from its place.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	 And then make that cut between your prepared hands, and let the patient's hands be under his buttocks, so that the entire bladder is tilted towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	 And then remove it completely from there.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	 Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you should quickly cut into him.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	 And if you do not get all of it with your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint your index finger of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the little finger if he is a young man, and insert it into his anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	 "And seek within the stone until it is beneath your tongue.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	 And turn (or transform) that little by little into the bladder's neck.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	 Then press on it with your finger, and push it out through the cut area near where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	 And command the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend the patient's knees upwards with their right hand, and with their other hand to raise the penis that is beneath the knees, in the area where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And then insert a spatula, which should look like this:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	 And make an incision between the anus and the scrotum, not in the middle, but towards the left buttock; and let the incision be on that stone, and your finger should be in the rectum, and let the incision be transverse, so that the external part of the incision is wide and the internal part narrow according to how much of the stone can be grasped with the finger, no more, because when you press your finger, which is in the rectum, on the stone, you will extract it without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	 And know that there is a stone with angles and edges, for which the extraction from it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	 And of that [stone], there is one similar to a seed, and it is round, and an easy extraction is made from it.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	 Therefore, if it is the one with angles and edges, insert it into the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	 And if it is not so inserted, then you must invent over it, or strengthen over it with a suitable tool, the end of which should be like a file with which you can press against the stone, and nothing will come out from it; or insert beneath it a subtle instrument with a curved tip.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	 But if you cannot [do it] on that [stone], then you should widen the hole a little, and if you see a flow of blood, immediately cut it off with powdered vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	 But if the stone is more than one, then at first you should press your hand against the mouth of the bladder, and then cut it open; and then press a little on that; and do the same thing if there are more than two stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	 And if the stone is very large, it is unskilled to cut it with a large incision, because two things may happen to the patient: either they die or continuous dripping of urine occurs, because the place is not completely healed.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	 "But administer an expulsion of it from within that is evacuated, or introduce in the fracture with forceps until it extracts in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	 When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloes and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	 And place upon that cloth infused with oil and wine, or with warm oil and hot water, to ensure the abscess is effectively drawn out.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	 And then lay the patient on their back, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	 And when you have removed it, wash the area with water and a little oil, and then treat it with an ointment of diaphoretic herbs and an ointment of diabezoil until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	 However, if an abscess forms in the wound, adhesive and corrosive, and it appears as if blood is frozen in the bladder, and urine is blocked (and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains, it provokes the bladder to rot and causes putrefaction in the patient.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and apply all appropriate remedies to promote healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given line:
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if the stone is small and it is in the meat of the bladder, and it has been placed there, and the release of urine is prohibited, then cure that with water that I recommend before reaching dryness, because excessive use of this treatment is accused of dryness. And I have tested this, which is that you take a perforator of iron fillet, the form of which is as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	 With a sharpened triangular tip, sharp, placed in a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	 And then take thread, and tie the bladder with that below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	 And then insert the iron into the bladder, easily piercing until the perforator reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	 And rotate the perforator with your hand in that stone little by little, and you will pierce the hole until you make it penetrate from the other side, for the urine is released immediately.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	 And then press your hand over the area that is rough on the stone's outer side of the bladder, because that is pierced and washed away with the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	 If this cure is not suitable for you due to any reason that prevents it, then place one rope below the stone, and another rope above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	 Then immediately sit on the stone in that way between two ropes.
E aprop extratz aquela.	 And then remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	 Then untie the bandage and clean the congealed blood that is on the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	 And it is not necessary to tie the rope below the stone, except so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other rope above, because when the rope is untied near the edge of the stone, the cord returns to its place and covers the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	 And for this reason it is necessary for you when you tie the rope above, that you lift the cord to the sides above, or return your compliment, and cover the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	 Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	 On the extraction of stone from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	 Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	 But if a stone is seen in one of them, then the cure for it is difficult and it is prohibited by many ways.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	 One of them is because the woman is very weak.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	 And the second reason is that you will not find a woman who is well-informed enough to uncover herself to a physician when she is chaste or one of the women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	 And the third reason is that you will not find a woman who is very skilled in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	 And the fourth reason is that in women the site of the incision near the bladder is far from the bladder itself, so you need a long incision, and there is fear [of complications] with that.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	 However, if necessity compels you to do so, then you should take a female physician who is very skilled, and she is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	 But if you are deprived of her, then seek a skilled and subtle physician, or present a well-educated midwife in the ways of women, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	 Therefore, present her [the woman] and command her to do everything you order her to do, from the inquiry about the bladder at the beginning; this is so that she can see if the woman is a virgin, for which reason she should insert her finger into her vagina and search for the cervix.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	 Therefore, if she finds it [the cervix], let her withdraw her finger, and then command her to make the incision on it [the cervix].
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	 Certainly! Let's translate the text line by line:
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	 It seems like you've provided the first source sentence, but I don't see the actual sentence here. Please provide the medieval text that you would like me to translate into English.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	 And at the beginning, let the incision be small; then introduce the ray into that incision, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to the size which you know the stone will exit from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	 And know that the types of stones are many: for there are few and large, and smooth and rough, and long and round, and having ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	 Therefore, you know how many types there are of it, by what you indicate about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 And if you see blood flow, place crushed vitriol on the area and keep it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	 And ensure that you have prepared with yourself the instruments mentioned for the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	 And if you see blood flow and know that the bleeding is from the artery that has been cut, then place powder on the area and press it with fingers and a stricture until the bleeding stops; do not move it; leave the stone and do not remove it, for the patient will soon die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	 And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 Therefore, once the sharpness of the blood has passed after several days and the area softens, then you return to your procedure until the stone is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	 Chapter 62
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	 On incision for hernia in the groin.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	 A hydrocele is nothing more than an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane which lies beneath the spermatic cord containing the testicle, and it is called a cyst.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	 And sometimes it is in the proper scrotum which nature has prepared for the testicle until another testicle appears; and it is the cord of the spermatic duct between the white membrane mentioned above, and this is not a cyst but a hernia.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	 And the cause of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the testicles, because at those times this substance flows out, and sometimes it happens due to a blow to the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	 And this moisture has many colors, for the color of it is either declining to a yellow or reddish color, or red, or black and turbid, or watery white, and the latter is what is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	 And the signs by which it is known that this accumulation of water occurs are these: because if it is in the white part that we have mentioned, then the swelling appears round and a little long, like the shape of an egg, and the genitalia appear, because the humidity extends to all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	 And if the humidity is in the proper skin layer, then the swelling appears round like half an egg, and for this reason it is believed to be another egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	 And if the humidity is between the root of the genitals and the white part, then it is necessary to leave it alone.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	 And if you want to know the color of the humidity, then test the color of the humidity in the swelling with a glass of the same shape; and according to what appears in the trace of the glass, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	 Therefore, when we come to the treatment of him with iron, then it is necessary that we command the patient to be phlebotomized if possible for you, and empty his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	 Then he should be laid on his back on some elevated cause, and leave words of comfort with him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	 And you should sit on the left side of him/her, and command the assistant to stand on his/her right side, who should extend their rod towards one of the two flanks at the level of the kidneys and the lower part of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	 And then take a wide spatula and carefully cut along the middle of the back from the neck to the waist.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	 And make the incision straight and equally distant from the line that should divide the spine of the back, until it reaches the white tendon encompassing it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	 And scrape that away, and observe, and be careful not to cut it; and your scraping should be thin and delicate, so that it is held up by the most subtle and thorough scraping possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	 And then puncture the white tendon with a wide hole, and extract all the water from it.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	 And then separate the two lips of the incision with a hook, and extend the white tendon towards both ends; and do not touch the spine encompassing the back, and cut the tendon in such a way as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	 And cut it completely or in pieces, and especially its delicate side, because if you do not carefully scrutinize the incision of it, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	 Based on the given translation pattern and the structure of the provided text, here's a line-by-line translation of the new sentence:
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	 Here's the translation for the given sentence:
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	 But if the water is divided into two equal parts, then know that there are two hernias. Therefore, incise that part as you have done in the other; and if it appears to be one operation, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	 And then you clean the blood, and in between the incisions place wool soaked in oil or olive oil; and place another wool soaked in wine and oil outside, and spread it over two cushions and the edge of the belly; and place on top double-layered cloths and pillows, and bind them together with a bandage according to this manner:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	 And then take two cloths and soak them in carded wool according to this likeness; and make the ends with which you press from either side or damp wool, and attach them securely in the crotch of the pants, and one end should go from the buttocks into the back, and the second should go to the groin area, and two ends under two cushions and two other ends over two knees, and all the binding should be secured in the crotch of the pants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	 And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of cutting with iron; and it is that you take a subtle scalpel-like cautery and incise with it the cords of the genitals, and it burns according to what we have recommended until the white bladder containing water is revealed, and then you take a cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	 and it resembles a Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	 And then you puncture the bladder with that cautery, and it is burnt until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	 And then you stretch the bladder with hooks, and scrape it with hooks, and scrape it with a thin, heated cautery; and incise it as much as possible until you eradicate all of it; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	 And know that this operation is safer and less prone to blood flow, and better than an operation with cutting.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	 But if an abscess forms during the cutting or cauterization, or if there is bleeding, then you should treat whatever opposition occurs to you accordingly, with the care that is appropriate for it as it is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	 Here's the translation for the given sentence:
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	 And then I opened it widely so that all the water could flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	 And then place your hand over the opening and tie it securely to ensure that all remaining water can flow out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 And then take care of it so that the wound may heal.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	 But if there is resistance to the egress of water at that time, you should puncture it: and this is only done because the white fat in the orifice of the wound resists and prohibits the exit of the water. Therefore, it is necessary for you to insert into the wound a pen or instrument with which water can be extracted from drops, as described above; or adjust a small tube in the opening of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	 And know that the water will return and may be collected again within four to six months or a year; and when it is accumulated, then it should be punctured in the same manner, because the patient will thus pass through their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	 Chapter 63
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	 Of incision on a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	 Know that in the incision of this hernia there is fear of losing it to death in greater dispositions, so I have seen its dismissal and being saved by the best method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	 And I am remembering the operation in that area and the species of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	 Therefore, I say that abscesses arise in the bodies of those whose humors are imbalanced and this occurs for several reasons: either due to an acute bitter superfluity that is infused into the humors, or due to a blow.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	 And the color of the abscess matches the color of the body, and it is not found to be painful, and it is a serious abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	 And if the abscess is light, it is called "lapificated," whose color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	 And sometimes it is caused by a knot in the veins or by an inflammation of these veins so that the memory of it is already perceived, or by an inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	 But that which is caused by an inflammation of the veins is known by the dispersal of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	 But that which is caused by an inflammation of the vein does not disperse at all when compressed with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	 And it is possible to perform a section on this type as well as on other tissues; and that is for you to incise the sheath of the humors, and then extend the egg over the divided parts, and extract the white from the yolk, and cut the suspensory ligament of the vessels, and tie them off, and incise the ligament after you have separated it from all the divided parts of the yolk. 
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	 If the eye is already sealed with those skin flaps, then you should remove the eye and sew it up.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	 And if there is adhesion between any part of the intestines or between what is between the intestines, then you should free all that adhesion and sew it up with round stitches.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	 But if there is native flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind it, then you should sew up all that is from it, and remove the eye as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Therefore, once your operation is completed, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	 Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	 On the treatment of hernias due to wind.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	 Wind is an encapsulated abscess surrounded by some membrane resembling a cyst, with softening of the testicles, and makes walking and exercise difficult for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	 And in the treatment of this illness, it is done out of fear of what precedes memory (i.e., prevention).
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	 Nevertheless, we must speak of the operation that was performed by the first ones.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	 And I say that it is necessary to lay the patient on an elevated table; then lift up the support of the testicles from below; and next take the penis with your fingers through the foreskin; and let another assistant hold this, and stretch it strongly.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	 And next, make an incision with a sharp scalpel transversely on the right side of the vessels until the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	 And next, peel away from all sides as we have said in the extraction of arrows that are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	 And next, insert into them a needle with a double thread, and tie it at the first place where life is found, and tie it again at the last of their [vessels].
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	 And next, make a straight incision through the middle of them according to the length of the body, and extract what has accumulated from the foul and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	 And then treat the wound with a remedy for other wounds in which you wish to promote healing, so that the vessels may close and thus prevent necrosis of one of the two testicles, because this is not harmful.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	 Sure, let's break down the text and translate it line by line:
Capitol .lxv.	 Based on the context provided and the similarity to medieval medical treatises, I would translate "Capitol .lxv." as:
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	 Based on the context provided in your previous examples, I'll attempt a translation of "De la cura de hernia entestinal." into English line by line:
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	 The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends on the belly from the sides of the miracle of the belly, because some of the intestines coming out of that rupture.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	 And this rupture is either of the ciphac or an excrescence of it, and these two types occur for various reasons: by impact, by leap, by loud noise, by sudden elevation due to some serious cause, or by similar events.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	 The sign of this, when it is due to extension of the ciphac, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and is an abscess inside the belly because the ciphac presses on the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	 The sign of it is when it is due to a rupture of the ciphac, because at first it causes sudden and severe pain; and it appears as an abscess near the coccyx bone, and this is because the intestine has come out, and its body is protruding outside the ciphac.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	 And sometimes it comes out with the intestine, and this type of hernia is called an enteric-scrotal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	 In the treatment of this disease with iron, caution is necessary because it must be avoided in that case.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	 The manner of performing this operation is to instruct the patient to return the intestine with their hand into the depths of its cavity if they obey their return, and then place yourself face to face between their legs, holding their hands, and raise their thighs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	 Then place the string that is the string of the testicles on top, and cut through the entire length of the testicle string; then insert into the two lips of the incision scissors according to what you need to open the incision with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	 And if the opening, according to the quantity that is possible for you, has been enlarged enough.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	 Then carefully remove the fat that is left after the testicle string, until the white hard tissue is revealed from each side.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	 Then insert your finger into the testicle, which is between the white fat that remains after the string of the egg, and separate it from the fat behind the egg, removing the adhesion in that area.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	 Here's my attempt to translate the provided sentence:
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	 And search with these words that there is no cause of the intestine wrapped in a white, hard cover.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	 But if you find any cause related to him, then you peel that from his abdomen below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	 And then you take a needle with which there is thick thread made of x threads, and insert that into the back of the cover, which is below the tail of the testicles, which is called incision; and then cut off the extremities which extend from the thread until they are four threads long, and then place some of them on top of each other in a manner resembling a cross; and tie that cover which we have said is below the tail of the testicles with a strong bond from both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	 And then wrap the extremities of the threads and tie them strongly with a firm bond, so that any of the vessels that nourish these cannot transmit any cause, lest an abscess form here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	 And place another bond a second time, according to the strength of the first bond, distant from it by three digits; and then leave this cover, which is below the tail of the testicles, the amount of the size of a digit, and cut off all the remaining parts in a circular manner, and remove the egg from it. 
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	 And then make an incision in the area below the tail of the testicles, so that blood and pus may flow out as we have recommended in this treatise.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	 And then administer lanolin soaked in oil and apply it to the wound; administer the ointment that we have recommended (and sometimes white cipher is cauterized, which we said near the incision to prevent bleeding, because many times this happens). Leave the ointment until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	 But if the scab takes too long to fall off, then soak it in hot water and place it over the area until it falls off, as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat the wound with the other wound care method until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	 Chapter 66
De hernia ventosa.	 Of a windy hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	 In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has dared to treat it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	 And the first ones said that it should be done as we have recommended for a hernia with veins; which is that you tie off the vessels near the incision gently; and then make an incision in the middle of the area around the abscess with water that opens it, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	 And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	 Chapter 67
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	 Of the dysfunction that occurs in the joints.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	 Sometimes there is a rupture in the joints as we have said, and it protrudes from the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	 And do not give any cause to the intestines to the genitals; and if they give, it is little; and it returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	 But if the time with this is prolonged, there is a fixed fissure in the bladder until it descends into the bladder; and this happens due to the extension of the bladder which is in the joints as we have said, whose cause is that the bladder is extended, and then it becomes softened and the place becomes swollen and protrudes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	 And its cure is with cautery as has been previously described in this account.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	 And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and that is the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then dry the place of the protruding rupture of the swellings with dry heat according to the extent corresponding to three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	 This phrase translates to: "And then strengthen the white bandage that is under the collar until it is revealed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	 And then take the reed and place it on the prominent part of the bandage, and press it against the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	 And then sew the two prominent parts at the end of the bandage together with stitches.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	 And then remove the end of the reed, and do not cut off all of the bandage, nor extend it outward, nor any other similar cause, as I will tell you in the treatment for intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	 And then treat it with the treatment for wounds, and when you have cut the threads, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is healed; because the bandage is tight and not adjusted to the prominence of the rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	 A cautery is better in this place, because it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	 Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	 About softening the testicle's neck.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	 Often the neck of the testicles in some men is softened by this because the flesh that is between them is softened and it is believed to be beneficial for him.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	 When it is necessary for the person who is responsible for the patient's care to lay them down according to their body shape, then remove all the bedding that has been softened on top of the natural bedding; and then carefully sew together two lips with a stitch.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	 And if you wish, at the beginning, cauterize the excess of the softened bedding with three or four firm stitches.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	 And then cut between the stitches; and then cure with other remedies until it is healed and the threads fall off.
Capitol .lxix.	 Chapter 69.
De castracio.	 Of Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	 Know that in our law, castration is forbidden, but for certain reasons it has come to my attention to write about it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except in two ways. One way is so that this may be known by the physician when he is asked about it, that he knows how to cure the one on whom it occurs. The other way is that we have often had necessity for the castration of other animals for our use of them, such as mules, and oxen, and pigs, and similarly with other animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	 And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either by torsion or by incision and excision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	 But in that which is done by torsion, the way to perform the operation is that we make the beast lie down in hot water until its testicles are softened and loosened and hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	 And then take them with your hand until they are dissolved and do not appear below the contact.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	 But in castration done by incision and excision, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press its spermatic cord with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	 And then tie the suspensory ligaments, and make an incision on each testicle with a single cut until two testicles are processed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	 And then make another incision on each one that you have removed.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	 And do not leave any trace on them, except for the slight scar that is above the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	 And this method of castration is better when done by torsion, because torsion leaves less trace of the testicles, so that the beast desires coitus.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 And then care for the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	 It looks like you are starting with the translation of a new chapter or section from the medieval medical treatise. The phrase "Capitol .lxx." likely means "Chapter 70" in Latin numerals. This indicates that we are beginning with Chapter 70 of the text. If you provide more sentences, I can assist you further by translating them into English as well.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	 "De la cura de hermafrodozia" means "On the treatment of hermaphroditism." This is the title or topic of Chapter 70 in the medieval medical treatise.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	 "Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when it appears that the space between the testicles contains what looks like a female vulva with pubic hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	 "And sometimes from this, urine runs which is in the space between the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	 "In women, it is of one kind: and that is when the woman's vulva on the pubis appears like two male testicles, a little less prominent at the outer edge, like a man's foreskin and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	 "And the treatment is of three kinds: for two types in men, and one type in women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	 "And it is important that you first remove those attached tissues until the swelling subsides, and then treat them with the same treatment used for other diseases.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	 "And in the second type of men, where there is urine running through the space between the testicles, there is no treatment or surgery for him.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	 Of constipation and prominent flesh due to causes related to women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	 Constipation is generally attributed to natural causes until it becomes excessive, and it is treated with caution; sometimes it is magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads like it does in men and persists even during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	 Therefore, you should hold the excess constipation with your hand or with an ointment and herbs.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	 And do not apply too much ointment, especially on the rectum, to avoid causing bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	 And then care for it with remedies for diseases until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	 However, flesh that is born is flesh that grows on the mother's horror until it fills her up, and it is often found outside of its usual place according to its appearance (and for this reason some people call it "tail-shaped illness"); therefore, we should treat it in the same way as constipation, and cure it until it is healed. ️
Capitol .lxxii.	 Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	 About the treatment of skin diseases.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	 Skin disease occurs when the woman's vulva is not opened or is only slightly opened.
E es o natural o accidental.	 And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	 Accidental (pain) is due to an underlying illness, and that illness is caused either by flesh that is not well-aligned or by a subtle or thick humour.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	 And it occurs either in the womb of the mother, or in her ribs, or in her upper abdomen, or in her lower abdomen. Prohibit cutting, engaging in intercourse, and pregnancy, and strongly prohibit menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	 And the knowledge of this is obtained by examination of the midwife, if the inflammation is apparent, immediately; but if it is not apparent, then search for it with your fingers or with a rod.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	 But if the inflammation is due to a subtle humour and is close to the two lips (labia), then cut and drain it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	 And place your fingers on both sets of lips (labia minora and majora), then place your thumbs together on both sides at the same time.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	 And the woman should be lying on her back with her legs spread apart, then forcefully separate both sets of lips until that subtle humour is broken and the inflammation is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	 Then take wool, soak it in oil and place it on the area, and come back the next day to ensure that the wound does not close up.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	 "But if the clot is large and thick, then it is necessary that you insert a spatula or a myrtle leaf into it.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	 "But if the obstruction is by flesh, then suspend it with a hook, and cut it open.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	 "And use the medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and henna, mixed with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	 "And then administer a wide lead probe so that the wound is not lightly cauterized.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	 "And keep it for several days, and administer some dry leaves to it.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	 "Then it should be treated with the other consolidation remedy until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	 "And sometimes it happens during the birth of other animals, and then you should proceed in this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	 "But if this is due to cancerous abscesses, do not perform any procedure against the cancerous abscess that is in the womb.
Capitol .lxxiii.	 Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	 "On the care of hemorrhoids, and tail, and red bump that occur in the vagina of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	 And I have already said in the division the types of those and their signs, and I will also say those that receive care and those that do not receive care.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	 Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and teeth, when they are in the womb of the mother and do not appear to be felt, then in those cases, care should not be done with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	 But those which are in the mother's opening and on which one feels sensation, those are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	 And it is necessary that you put the woman in cold air and then extinguish it with fire tongs or with rough cloth and incise those with the nails.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	 And then sprinkle on those the flow of blood from one of the cutting powders without biting, such as ashes and similar to that.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	 And then wrap her feet in cold water for an hour, and then put that [her foot] in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	 And if the bleeding persists, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rinds and leaves and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	 And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, make an ointment with water on the back of him/her.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence into English:
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then take wool and soak it in either coliander juice, or rosemary juice, or rue juice with five parts wine, and apply it to the area; and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	 And ask the one who is of great experience, so that you may inscribe this according to what seems appropriate to him just as I have said in this language.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And treat that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	 Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	 When a perforation of the eardrum occurs in a pregnant woman.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	 Many species of abscesses can occur in a pregnant woman, such as carbuncles and abscesses of the teeth and ulcers and hives and erysipelas and anal fistulas and hemorrhoids and others.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	 And I have already mentioned these illnesses and the species of those and their symptoms, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	 And it is necessary for me to speak in this treatise about the abscess that occurs in a pregnant woman when it is one of the abscesses that I have mentioned, and if you want to know how its operation is performed with iron.  (Note: "opperacio" likely refers to a surgical procedure such as lancing or draining an abscess.)
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	 Adonc: Then or Therefore
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	 Here's the translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	 And then the midwife should follow from the right side and with her left hand hold the instrument that has been used to open the orifice of the mother, the shape of which will be revealed in the following instructions.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	 And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument you should insert it with the right hand into the orifice of the mother of the woman, and that which enters from the instrument into the mother should not exceed the size of the orifice of the mother and be gentle with the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	 But if the instrument is larger than the orifice of the mother, then you should place cloths on the surface of the orifice of the mother to prevent any instrument from entering the orifice of the mother.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	 And it is necessary that you place the end of the string that runs along the instrument on the left side and above, and that the administrator holds the instrument and turns the string until the orifice of the mother is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	 And when the excretion appears and it is touched by hand and is hot and wet, then you should dry that part with a linen cloth.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	 And when the pus has been evacuated, then you should place on the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil, in which there is some styptic property; and apply the pressure to the edge of the orifice of the mother.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	 And place outside the mother and over the mattress a clean wool blanket soaked in water, on which mallow flowers are placed.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 Then let it be treated for about two days with an ointment that should be applied until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	 And sometimes the wound and the affected area are washed so that it is sterilized with water and honey, then with water in which the root of lily or long aristolochia is boiled, and then returned to the ointment treatment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	 And if the wound is deeply embedded in the flesh, then it is necessary that you be prohibited from treating him with iron, but take care of him with water as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	 Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	 To teach the midwives how to treat childbirth fever when it appears in an unnatural way, as shown in the figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	 It is necessary for the midwife to know at the beginning the figure of a natural childbirth by its signs, and that when you see the woman pressing down on her thighs and desiring to smell the air, and over this she is relieved because of what is happening to her during labor, and hastens the exit of the baby, then you know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and it is the baby's exit with its head first, and the second with that or hanging or dangling from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	 When you see these signs, then it is necessary to press the stomach of the woman so that the fetus descends gently, because when it descends onto its head, give her the second birth, and cleanse her of those excesses with a good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	 But if it is the other way around, it is unnatural and not commendable, for when the fetus exits feet first and the body follows the head and the legs, or one hand comes out with a foot, or the head comes out with a hand, or the belly turns over on its neck, and there are similar uncommendable presentations.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	 Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and discerning in all these matters, and to guard against error and disappointment.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	 And I am showing all the figures of those [presentations] and what skill is in them so that it may be indicated by this and be placed above this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	 When the child comes out headfirst by natural means, and it is strong on the woman and it becomes difficult for her, and sometimes her strength is already weakened, then make this drink: [or let the women have it] and steam the vulva of the woman with hot fenugreek and moist oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	 The text appears to be discussing a medical procedure involving the use of an instrument called a "metrona" and a substance referred to as "segondina." Here's a line-by-line translation:
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	 And press the woman's belly until she gives birth.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	 But if she does not [give birth], then it is necessary for the woman to be anointed with a mixture of pepper and fenugreek, using a mortar and pestle.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	 And then command her to be pressed and make her sneeze with conditions; and hold her mouth and nose for one hour, because the birth will follow shortly after.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	 And if both hands of the child have come out at the beginning, then it is necessary for you to gently push them back little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	 But if [the child] does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a board and lift her feet up, and then knock the board against the ground; and have the woman held so that she does not fall due to the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	 And if the hands are not turned back and the child dies, then cut them off and extract the remnant of the child or tie its body to its hand with a cloth and pull it out equally, because that will follow shortly after.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	 About the expulsion of the fetus from its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	 When the child comes out from its feet, then it is necessary for you to push those [feet] upwards, and then turn the child slightly, and then you should knead it, and then take one of its feet and stretch them little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	 When he has exited the space between the thighs, then you command him to express himself, and make him sneeze with conditions, for it will be better if God wishes it so.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	 And if it is not better with what we have recommended, then you return the small object little by little until you place that second figure naturally, for that will be better with a gentle exit.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	 And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take of the mucilage of althea and dissolved gum, and pound it all in the mortar with good beating, and then line it with water on the woman's vulva, under her lower belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	 And then make her sit in warm water until she reaches the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	 And when you see that the parts left of him are softened, then make for him a fumigation of myrtle and place it under him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	 And when you have fumigated him for an hour, then make him sit on a chair, and then make him sneeze and open his mouth, and lift that object, and press the lower part of his belly with gentle compression, for the object will soon come out.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	 This sentence means: "Now do the same on his teeth and his hands." Here's a line-by-line translation:
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	 When the act is completed according to this method, then you gradually introduce your hands; and after that, let the woman remain seated on her heels, with her feet hanging down, those should be resting on the bed, and complete your actions with your hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	 Then press gently on the belly of the patient little by little, and then extract what is left between their legs from the ears until it is prepared for the final departure.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	 And if the act is not yet completed, then take the patient's feet and move them vigorously, and then press little by little on what is above the hypochondria until the act rises to the parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	 Then introduce your hands and carefully guide the act little by little, and command the woman to bear down until the act is completed.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	 Similarly, allow the afterbirth to hang from one of your hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	 It should be attempted to reduce the hand with it, but if you cannot do this, then lift the woman and make her walk around.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	 And if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed, and shake her body vigorously, and then administer emetics which I have recommended from herbs.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	 When the delivery is upon us, then make that incision on the pubic bone, and study over the reduction of the hand, and place the fetus according to natural figure, and make the woman sneeze, and command her to compress herself until it is delivered.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	 When the infant is born, spread its hands and place it on the back of its mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	 Let the midwife have the hand of the child and gently turn him so that he turns easily.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	 And when it is done and as soon as he has been turned, then place on his navel that which we have recommended of oil and soft cloths.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	 And then command her to move little by little, and when you have done this, then make that cut on the pubic bone and command her to lean on the right side, and then command her to be compressed; and make her sneeze with conditions.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	 The exit of the prepared fetus is on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	 When the mother's horror has passed in this manner, consider, and then cut the secondine with your nail until it is emptied of its moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	 If the limb is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then you should cut it at the navel, to prevent it from being held and dying.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	 Then you should push the limb back into its parts inside until you place it according to what is needed, and send the woman to fetch some hot water, and the servant should pull it out gently with ease, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	 Birth of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	 Know that twins are often born with the same number of eyes, and sometimes three or four are born, but this is rare and late in coming; there are five natural causes for this, not six.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And count them, whether they are multiplied or not, as a second one, and separate them by the navel cord of each one of those, and sometimes they come out like this through natural easy birth, and sometimes they come out through unnatural birth that is inexplicable as we have said.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	 And if some of them are difficult to deliver and you arrive at what we have said about the unnatural figures, then you should care for them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	 And if the midwife is skillful and performs this task with ease and finesse, with care, and is clever according to every figure as it has been prepared by ingenuity for health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	 Remembering that which forms in the womb from embryos and miscarries.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	 Sometimes, in the mother, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or even ten (fetuses) are formed. It has already been verified that a woman gave birth to six, and another to ten all formed, which was caused by the measurement of the glorious wise.  This passage seems to describe multiple pregnancies and fetal development, with the final phrase possibly referring to divine or natural forces governing such occurrences.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	 And all this should be within the knowledge of the midwife because she quickly recognizes similar signs in that case and therefore prepares herself for it accordingly.
Capitol .lxxvi.	 Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	 On the extraction of the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	 When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medication and it is not yet expelled, and you are forced to use an operation with your hand, then consider if the woman is of sound virtue and does not suffer from any of the accidents for which her life is feared to be endangered.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	 "At that time, it is necessary for the woman to be placed on her left side on her back, and her head should be inclined downwards while her hips are raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	 "And the minister should hold or tie her down on her left side to prevent her body from spreading during the delivery of the child.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	 "Then you should moisturize the mother's mouth with oil, honey, and a mixture of anise, fennel, and linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	 "Then the midwife should anoint her hands with those oils and mixtures, then she should gently insert her hand into the mother, and then she should seek with her hand the place where the nails of the child are.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	 "At this point, consider if the child is ready to come out head first: then place your nails in its heels, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or under the chin, or on the breastbone, or near the ribs, or below the hypochondrium.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	 "But if the descent is by the feet, then in the heel, or in the middle of the thighs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	 "And it is necessary to hold the nails with the right hand and place the curvature of them in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and gently insert the hand until the nails reach one of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the soft part.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	 And let it be removed entirely, so that its removal is eased in the same way as it is done with teeth when their extraction is necessary.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	 And it is necessary that what is between them has its extension softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil, insert them expertly, and move that which is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	 Therefore, if the baby's head is stuck, then the nails should be pushed back towards where it is wider; and do this until the entire baby has been delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	 But if the hand is delivered before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to its constriction, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and then pull it out until all of it has been delivered, and then cut it either at the wrist or at the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	 And do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 But if the baby's head is large, or if it is constricted during delivery, or if there is water in the head, then it is necessary to insert between the fingers a spine spatula and split the head and extract the water, or use an instrument called "alundat" to do this. The shape of which will be explained with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	 And similarly act if the condition is a large head by nature. Then it is necessary to incise that with an instrument called algematu or extract it with alunda, as we have said; and then remove the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	 And if the head is protruded and constricted, you should use forceps, then split open until the fluid in the feet has drained out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	 But if it is not complicated and does not respond to extraction, then you should incise the head as soon as possible, according to your skill.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	 And if the sides of the abdomen are swollen or edematous, then you should pierce it until the fluid that is in it runs out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	 But if the condition is in its feet, then the attraction is light and the direction towards the mother's mouth is easy.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	 But if it is constricted in the abdomen and feet, then you should extract it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and split open the abdomen and feet until the fluid runs out of them.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	 But if the other limbs are outside and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, then she should insert her hand into the pelvic cavity, and with that she should look for the head, and pull it towards the mentioned until it reaches the mother's mouth. Then she should introduce one or two fingers into it, and pull it out with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	 And if the mother's mouth is constricted by an abscess that occurs in her, then it is necessary not to apply a cup over it; instead, it is necessary to administer a poultice of moist and fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	 And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	 And if it is on the same side, then if possible, let it be punctured: and administer the remedy that we have mentioned for a living wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	 And if this is not possible, then let it be incised into parts, and let it be extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	 And it is necessary that you leave no trace of the abscess inside.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	 And when you have completed all your operations, then administer the remedy that we have mentioned for the cure of such abscesses that occur in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	 And if there is a flow of blood, then give him water containing styptic herbs and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	 And I have already seen a woman in whose womb was a dead fetus, and on that same place another growth developed, and then the other fetus also died.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	 It happened to her that she had a long-standing abscess in her navel; and it swelled until it burst open, and she began to pass arms.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	 And I was called to care for him, and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	 Therefore, I placed on him some plasters of strong attraction, and an os came out of him, and after a few days, another os came out; and I was greatly amazed, since there are no bones in the stomach.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	 And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	 So I examined the wound and extracted many bones from it, the woman being in her seventh month of pregnancy, and she had been living this way for a long time, until a small arm came out of her.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	 And I did not consider this to be strange, but rather that in this there is science and help for those who practice the medical arts.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	 Of the shapes of the instruments necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	 The shape of the hook with which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	 This is the shape of a stretcher in which the lips are cut, with two hooks at both ends.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	 However, this hook should be more subtle and finer than the previous one, and it should be made either of ebony or boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	 And let the width of each post be approximately two finger-widths and the margin of each about one finger-width; and the length of each is a hand and a half; and in the middle of two posts there are two adjustments of that same post which are already fixed, whose length is a little more than half a hand, and the width of each is about two finger-widths or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	 And let these two additions be inserted into the mouth of the bedpan so that it will be opened with them when you turn the aforementioned two handles.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	 Another similar form, but more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	 It should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling the shape of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	 However, at the end of it there are two handles as you see, and the length of these handles is approximately one hand, and the width of each is two finger-widths.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	 And when you want to open the bedpan with them, then make the woman sit on the edge of the bed with her feet hanging down, and open that which is between her legs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	 Then open your hand with the instrument as you would do with forceps, according to the amount of opening of the bedpan's mouth that you want, until the midwife does what she wants.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	 The form of dizziness which the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	 The form of push or blow with which the person is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	 The form of head-butting with which one receives a blow to the head.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	 And it resembles a forceps with teeth at the ends, just like tongs, and sometimes it is made long like tongs according to this form, just like tongs, which have teeth like saw teeth, with which one cuts and strikes.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	 The form of head-butting a little
Forma de unci havent una spina:	 The form of an inch with a thorn.
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	 The form of two inches having two thorns
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	 The form of tongs with saw teeth, with which the person's head is struck.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	 The form of a spatula having two ends, with which the head is split in half.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	 The form of two wide spatulas.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	 All these instruments are exercised, and the more species of them there are and the better they are prepared by the craftsmen, the easier it is for their operation and the more useful they are to men in quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	 And do not work with these instruments anywhere without being prepared, because the need for them is unavoidable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	 Sure, let's translate "De extraccio de la segondina" into English line by line:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	 Here is the translation of the given text:
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	 And if not, then take an egg and make a hole in the shell, and place in it burning herbs such as calament, rue, hyssop, chamomile, Arabian saffron, and cinnamon.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	 All of these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water in the eggshell, and place it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	 Then place a reed cannula in the mouth of the patient and hold it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the patient's body.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	 Then make the patient sneeze as we have said, and on the second night the fever will leave quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	 But if this treatment is continued and the discharge does not come out, then instruct the midwife to submerge her left hand in oil of lilies or an ointment of althea, and insert it into the vagina, searching for the second wind, and when you have found it, take hold of it and draw it out little by little. But if it is attached in the womb of the patient, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the second wind, extract it little by little, straightening it out so that the patient does not suffer from a strong attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	 Before it is necessary that the right and left ribs be adjusted with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	 And then adjust in the amount of attraction, for she will obey and withdraw from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	 And if the mother's mouth is tightened, we have already prescribed the cure with swallowing and with a potion of oil with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	 But if it is not completely healed with all the causes we have prescribed, then be careful not to repeat the process of scraping, but rather, make sure that what has come out of her goes into the mother's mouth, and then treat that with ointment and tetrapharmacon; for this will cause it to rot in a few days and will dissolve and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	 But when it has rotted, there is a very bad odor rising to the head and stomach, which harms the patient; and at that time, it is necessary that appropriate fumigations and remedies be administered for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	 But some of the ancients have already tried fumigation with narcissus and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	 The method of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated must be retained for menstrual periods and the second stage [of childbirth]:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	 The text seems to be in an old form of Occitan or Provençal, which was a common language in southern France and parts of Italy during the Middle Ages. Let's translate it:
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	 Sure, let's break down this sentence and translate it line by line into English:
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	 "And ensure that smoke is produced until that place [the patient] is smoked out, then do it again.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	 Of the treatment for an unruptured child's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 Many children are born with unperforated anuses, which are subtle and closed.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	 Therefore, the midwife comes to open it with her finger, and if she cannot, she opens it with a sharp spatula, being careful not to touch the bowels.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	 And then place over that wool soaked in oil and vinegar; and then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	 But if you fear that it might be closed again, then insert a catheter into the opening for many days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	 And if closure of the anus occurs due to healing of a wound or abscess; then that healing must be cut open, and then it should be treated with water as we have said for the treatment of lead [poisoning].
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	 Of the treatment for fistulas that form below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	 The fistulas that occur in the lower part, which are nodular and thick, occur near the anus on the outside or in the space between the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	 "And it is an abscess or boil.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	 "And when that swelling is chronic and exudes white, watery pus or subtle pus, sometimes some of these abscesses penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	 "And those penetrating ones are known by what comes out of them through exiting and flatulence; sometimes the patient uses these for exiting, and often vermin come out of them.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	 "And some of those abscesses sometimes penetrate into the space of the bladder, and into the urethra; and some of them penetrate into the joint of the hip, and into the node of the knee.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	 "And what is known about a penetrating abscess into the anus and non-penetrating is that you insert your finger therein, and then introduce a subtle probe of iron or iron into the abscess when it is not turbid.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	 "But if there is turbidity in it, then introduce a subtle probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	 "And if you do not feel it at all or you do not proceed from the orifice any cause of discharge, whether vermin or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and thus approach the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	 And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the opening of the penis, then its significance is the discharge of urine from there and the prohibition to approach that place with medicine until it has healed.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	 But if it penetrates into the joint of the hip or into the bone and causes pain in the circumference, then the sign of this is that the tent seeks entry here, if within it there is not enough firmness in the bone, and causes pain in the surrounding area; and that from it comes gangrene quickly; and that no remedy works on it, nor is it healed with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	 And in all these penetrating fistulas there is not a cure for all, and the cure of those is labor and vanity of the foolish doctors upon whom they are inflicted.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	 But in those that do not penetrate and are not chronic, healing with iron is expected, as I will tell you, and this which I have already proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	 And have the patient lie down between your hands on his back and lift up his legs into them, let the thighs be inclined towards his belly, and then insert a lead tent or of iron if there is firmness in the fistula until you know the place where the tent enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	 And if that is how the patient feels around the neck, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger into the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if you feel in your finger that the tentacle is already trying to enter by itself and penetrate, or if you feel something between your finger and that, then know for certain that it is penetrating; and at that point do not work on it, because there is no cure for it, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	 However, some say that in some men it heals late.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	 And of the medicine by which help is expected in him is that you heat a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it has been said before, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those carnivorous fistulas resembling a quill of a bird are sufficiently adjusted.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	 And then cure that with cloths wrapped in soft cloth until all those adjusted tissues are completely healed, and then treat it with medicines that promote the growth and consolidation of the tissue. If it is healed, then good; if not, then it will never be cured by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	 And then carefully clean those flesh wounds that resemble a quill of a bird, ensuring none of them burst or rupture.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	 But if blood flow occurs between you and your operation when exploring those wounds, then it is advisable to cauterize with a light instrument, either with fire or with an acute medicine. Cautery with fire has two good effects: it brings the wounds together and causes desiccation of the humors by burning away the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	 Then bandage that area with cloth or linen until it reaches the elbow, and then treat the wound with ointments that harden and consolidate the flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	 And these medicines are characterized by astringency and desiccation; when the wound is restored, it is considered healed and there is no fear of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	 But if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and extends beyond the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it with that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	 And so if you feel the opening and between you and it there is only a thin layer of skin or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then it should not be operated on directly but rather by another method with confidence and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	 This is quite a complex passage dealing with medical treatment for what appears to be an anal fistula or abscess. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	 And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is near the end of the rectum around the body surface with the cord and at the edge of the anus, then take a perforated probe, which is like a needle used for preparing hides in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	 and then insert it wrapped in five threads or around those; and then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	 However, if it penetrates near the edge of the anus deeply inside, then you remove the thread from that opening as you insert your finger into the rectum; and extract the end of the thread and join both ends together, tightening each one, and leave it there for a day or two. And when you have drawn the thread more deeply into the flesh, tighten well so that the flesh between the two ends of the thread is drawn in and closes up.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	 Then care for the wound until it is healed and closed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	 But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrated, then make it penetrate by whatever method you have prepared, as long as it is in the flesh, because you should not do this to avoid injuring the skin; and then proceed with that until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	 Based on the context and pattern from the previous sentences, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	 "About the stitching of hemorrhoids that bleed during defecation.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	 "Hemorrhoids can be of two types: either they resemble small black currants or they are like soft grapes.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	 "And of these, some are small and large, and blood always flows from them, it is one drop at a time, and they protrude outside the anus, at its edges.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	 "However, those that protrude from the anus are of three types: one with little moisture, from which yellowish water or a little blood flows continuously; and according to the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	 "And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is to order the patient to sit and press until the anus comes out and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	 "Then take hold of them with your fingernails or something similar, and immediately cut them off at their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	 "But if your fingernails cannot grasp them due to their moisture and softness, then take hold of them with rough cloth or cotton or a woolen strip, and draw them out with the above-mentioned tools, and immediately cut them off and sprinkle some hot powders on them near the incision, so that they act as a cautery; or cauterize them according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 "And then care for those with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	 "And if the feces do not come out, then anoint the patient with castor oil that has a slight laxative effect, and wash them with water that will cause gentle expulsion when the patient is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	 "But if the hemorrhoids are protruding from the anus, then their cause is mild, and it is that you should take them with your finger or with tweezers, insert them back in, and then care for them with the water we mentioned until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	 "And for those who have a prolapse, it is necessary to administer sutures in the following manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and insert it into the hemorrhoids at the two sides above them. Make the needle penetrate with its point into the edge of the other side, and wrap the two ends of the thread below the needle, and tie them longitudinally; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong traction, and then knot the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	 "And do this for all of them, and leave one out and do not tie it, so that the excess blood can drain from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	 And then place a clean cloth infused with rose oil or cerate on the wound, and place that over the coal and instruct the patient to remain still.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And then let it sit until it sets; and when it is set, cure that with ointments or another treatment until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	 Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 Many openings occur due to the drying out of a crack or due to the constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 And because they are old and not suitable for that treatment, then you must scrape them with the tip of a spatula or your nail until they become wet, and remove the scab that forms on top, which prevents their healing; and then cure them until they are healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 Then you should remove them with a strong poultice, the first time they open and become raw; and then cure them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	 Of the treatment of almesamir, which is also known as cleft lip.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	 Know that almesamir is also known as cleft lip, and it is not so unless it appears round according to the color of the body, resembling a garlic clove head, and it occurs throughout the body but mainly in the areas below the feet and the fingers, and because of these pains you should treat them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	 And then it is necessary to cut away what is around the nail, and hold it with pincers or tweezers, and remove it from its root; then care for that area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	 And if you wish, cauterize the second part as described in the previous chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	 But a wart is a small, rough, round projection on the surface of the skin, and many are seen in children's hands.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	 And its treatment is to stretch and cut it, or to strangle it with a thread or a hair that fits through the hole.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	 And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with a sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	 And now they are removed, both inverted and non-inverted, with the instrument that I will describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	 But a mole is a small, feathered or large, rough projection on the surface of the skin, and it goes deep into the flesh, and when the cold finds it, it is as if bitten by an ant, and it is found around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	 And its treatment is to take a quill from the wing of a crow or from the wing of a vulture, and it should be strong, and place it on the mole until the circle of the quill contains all of its parts; then revolve your hand with the quill until you cut away what is around the mole, and press it into the depth of the flesh, and remove the mole from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	 And if you wish, do this with a needle made of iron or steel in the following manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	 Ensure that the tip of the needle is fine and not sharp, wrapped in such a way that the grasp on it is softened and its rotation is controlled.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	 And if you wish, cauterize the ants in the same manner as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery for athelia.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	 Concerning the instruments that are used to give treatment.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	 Sometimes treatment is given with instruments made of silver, lead, or melted and hammered iron; and sometimes these instruments are made in small and large sizes according to those to whom they are administered, because that which is used in the care of young children should be small; and for those whose anuses are constricted or painful, the treatment instruments should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	 The shape of large and few treatments:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	 The tip of the needle at its top, where the bag is tied, should be wide in this manner; and there should be space between where the bag is tied and the point like this:
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	 And the end of it below, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (that is, not open) and quite long, thinning towards the tip; and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should correspond to the size of the rays and a little larger.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	 And let there be a bag in which the medications of animal bladder or sheepskin are placed, and its size should be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	 And let it [the bag] be perforated by small holes in this way as it is rolled up; and if the space between the holes is as thick as a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	 And then insert into those holes a strong thread of raw thread which is from the same threads or surround them; and attach the bag to it; and when the bag is placed in it, tightly tie its opening between two points with strong string, and then cauterize each hole with that: But the way to cauterize with it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the amount of the patient's tolerance; and take care that it is not too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	 Then have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs up and place a pillow under them, on which they usually lie or a board; and then coat the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar; and then gently insert it into the anus; and then have the assistant take the bag and squeeze it with two hands and press with force until everything in the bag is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the bag and have the patient raise their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	 And if the medicine causes him to evacuate, let it be as much as possible; and if he sleeps with it throughout the night, it is more beneficial for his recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	 But if you treat him for abdominal pain and his evacuation is slow, then continue to apply the cautery until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	 And if in the rectum there are hemorrhoids or painful swellings, then let it be treated with a very fine and thin cautery, like those used to treat infants.
De curacio de las plaguas.	 On treating wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	 I have already said in the division of wound treatment what is appropriate for this book, and now I say that the treatment should be done with the hand and with medicines according to need.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	 Therefore, I say that wounds are differentiated according to how the wounds were made and where they occurred on the body.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	 And the causes for which many wounds are made include cutting by a stone, incision with a sword or knife, striking with a spear, club, arrow, or similar to these many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	 But the wounds that occur in different parts of the body are such as a wound that falls on the head, neck, foot, abdomen, chest, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	 "And I am recommending the treatment of some diseases so that you may use this reasoning and rule for other diseases as well.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	 "And I will begin with the simple head diseases, because the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	 "Therefore, I say that when a simple head injury occurs and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to the impact of a stone or similar object, and the membrane has only been slightly torn and there is a large wound with fear of an abscess forming, then you should quickly make an incision and bleed the cephalic vein immediately; do not delay this. And extract as much blood as the strength of the patient allows, unless some other reason prohibits bleeding, especially if little blood has come out from the wound.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	 "And let the bleeding be done on the opposite side of the injured part; and keep the patient from filling up with food and drink, especially heavy meals.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	 "But if some reason prevents bleeding, then let the patient reduce their food intake and avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	 "And place on the wound, if an abscess forms, cotton infused with rose oil or wine that has been boiled down.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	 "But if you are sure that the abscess is about to burst, then place your hand over the wound. If it is recent, use its own blood and do not change the powder that I will tell you about shortly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	 "And if the air has already changed it, then place some ointments on it until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	 "But if the wound is large or caused by a knife or something similar, and its edges are not held together by small fleshy parts, then join them together with a stitch as I will tell you about the method of stitching.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	 "But if the wound is already open to the bone and marrow, and there is no retention of it except for a small ligament, then incise it and immediately treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place with sutures. And order the patient to be fed on foods that are easy to digest: heads, breasts, and similar things, until it heals.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	 "And if you find putrefaction in the suture and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut out all that is rotten and wash it, and immediately treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	 "But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood could flow and it has not been cut by medicines, then you should search for the vessel. And if you find it uncut, then cut it with a spatula or tie it off; and if necessity compels you to do something else, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	 And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; so you sprinkle this powder over them, for when it hardens before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	 And the manner of making this powder is as follows: take one part of linseed oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of burnt ochre; let all these be very finely ground and sifted, and with it fill up the plague, and bind it tightly with a good bandage until it adheres well to it and is coagulated with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	 Then bind it tightly above with bandages and leave it alone, and do not unbind it until it is healed, for the medicine will not be effective if removed before healing occurs.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	 And sometimes this remedy alone cures when you do not have linseed oil and dragon's blood at hand.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	 And you perform the same operation on large wounds when it is necessary to place a bandage over them and bind them tightly, and these are recent wounds with blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 And if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then this powder is not suitable for application. Instead, treat them with the water-based ointment we mentioned earlier, or place barley flour paste mixed with water and honey on them until they become dry; then continue treatment with the other remedy until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	 But if the injury is a bone fracture and it's small, then you should extract it with tweezers.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	 And I will describe the treatment for skull fractures as follows:
De las plaguas del col.	 Of the neck wounds.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	 But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment from a simple head wound.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	 But if the nerve or artery in the neck has been cut, then if it is a nerve, there is no cure for it except to avoid treating it with anything that causes strong constriction, such as ziniar and zegi which are vitriol and similar substances that harm nerves and constrict them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	 And do not apply any remedy directly onto the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold and their extension goes to the brain, which is the most important of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	 And if it is treated with light medications, such as by washing the wound with warm water, sometimes infused with rose oil or not, and afterwards when washed with warm water and other soothing ointments applied in this manner, and moist poultices.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	 If the wound is large, then administer stitches or sew up the lips of it, and then treat it with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	 But if the wound is deep or occurs in the lower part of the body, causing gangrene, then puncture it in the most depressed area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	 But if an artery has already been cut in the wound and blood is flowing, then separate or dry up the area, or bind it, or cauterize it if necessity requires this.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	 But if the tendons of the throat or all of them have already been cut and the veins of the neck have been saved, then bring together the lips of the wound with a suture on the edge of the throat and do not touch it; first, equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and then strengthen it with a decent bandage, and leave it for several days; and then treat it with ointments that have astringent and healing properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	 But if the wound has penetrated to the bone, then you should puncture it; and if there are bone fragments within it, extract all that you can; and what is not apparent to you, leave until the wound becomes putrid, and separates, and the inflammation of it is relieved.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	 And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	 And if a fistula is formed in the wound, then cure it with water of which the memory will come to you soon in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	 Of the wounds of the neck or similar, when made between the shoulders and made with a dagger, sword, lance, or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	 If it is a puncture from a lance or sword and you see its depth, then consider more if there is an air leak when the patient inhales; then you know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	 And if there is no depth and the wound is recent with its blood, then in the first hour you should sprinkle over it powder, and do not strain it so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returns to the heart and kills the patient; rather, apply an attractive ointment on it, and repeat this two times a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	 And if the ointment is not at hand, then you should place over the orifice of the wound a piece of wool so that it draws out water from the humors; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that the water in it drains out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	 Let's break down the sentence into smaller parts and translate it line by line:
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	 "But if the healing of the patient is delayed and it has been open for a long time, then know that an abscess has already formed; therefore, treat it according to its nature.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	 "And if the wound is caused by a knife or sword, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with water that has been used to clean the surgical instruments before stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	 "But if it has already affected the bone, and you see pieces of bone coming out, then you should turn the wound and use forceps to remove those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	 "But if the bone fragments are not separate, then leave them inside so that the wound can heal, making their removal easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	 "And for other wounds occurring in other parts of the body, the treatment is the same as we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	 "Of the wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	 "The disorder that occurs in the abdomen is either great, little, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	 "In the case of a great disorder, sometimes the intestine or nerves of the intestine are affected, which makes their removal and stitching more violent and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	 And a small rupture is difficult to repair by another method, and I know that their reduction is even more difficult if you do not cut into the opening of it immediately, because it swells and becomes thickened, making its repair difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	 Therefore, the best rupture is the smaller one, because in this case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two previously mentioned types.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	 And know that the stitching of the belly is done in four ways, but two stitches are common and suitable for stitching other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	 And the other two stitches are more appropriate for other wounds, but they are even more suitable for the stitching of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	 And I will explain to you each one with an explanation and description.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	 Therefore, I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the intestine through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has been inflated by the cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	 And therefore, when it is so, then you must scrape that area until you submerge a sponge or cloth moistened in lukewarm water alone, or mix the following in cold water: cumin, pepper, thyme, and marjoram, with which you should wash the intestine until the swelling has subsided.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	 And sometimes this works better in cases where there is bleeding, and it is better for the resolution of the swelling than water alone.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	 And therefore, when you see the swelling has subsided, then wet the intestine with water in which there is marjoram and mallow, for this will relieve his discomfort with little harm.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	 But if the patient's discomfort is not relieved by this treatment, then cut open the swelling slightly with an instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	 And the primary treatment is better when it is appropriate and not severe, so that there is no need for cutting and no weakness or debilitation.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	 About the instrument, see its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	 One part of it is sharply curved, and the other part is not sharp, and the tip should be thin but not as sharp as a knife, instead it should be blunt at the end.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	 And therefore, when the wound has been enlarged and the intestine has come out, it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible on top of this, because it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	 But when the opening is large and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and lift their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should lift the patient's head and feet higher than the affected area.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	 Similarly, if the opening is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always keep your intention and attention focused on making the side with the wound higher than the other side.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	 And thus you should apply this method to both large wounds and smaller ones.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	 And in small wounds, ensure that what is ready is prepared, and then make sure the minister is between your fingers, holding the entire opening with their hand and bringing its lips together, and then discover if there is any other cause for another stitch.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	 Here's the translation of the sentence:
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	 Sure, here's the translation of the given sentence:
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	 And let the needles be mid-sized between coarseness and finesse, because fine needles cut the flesh too lightly; and the coarse ones enter the vein with difficulty, so it is necessary that they are mid-sized in both fineness and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	 And it is not advisable for the needle to be placed at the two ends of the vein too closely, so that the flesh is not cut lightly and the wound opens before healing properly.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	 And do not prolong the stitching, lest the wound be prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	 Then cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient during sleep; and place over the stitching expanded pulp of all kinds, which have the ends of the needles; and leave those in until you know that the wound has already healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	 And this kind of stitching with needles is most suitable for small wounds, because in their stitching only one or two needles are used, or around that number.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	 However, the second type of stitch is common: and it is that you administer the four ends, of the vein and two ends of the thread, all at once, with a needle in which the thread is wrapped equally in fineness and coarseness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	 And then when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, remove the needle from the same point where it began, so that the thread can be pulled back up through the wound, making the stitching similar to sewing cloth together which is securely tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	 And place between each stitch the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	 And this method is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	 And with this stitching I sutured the wound that was inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been struck by a sword, and the opening of the wound was greater than a palm's width, and about two palms of the intestines had come out around the middle part, and the tearing was in the middle of the limb; and then I returned that which had come out of the wound after twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	 And the wound was healed within fifteen days or thereabouts, and I cured him and he recovered; and then he lived for many years after that, and is well in his habits.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	 And the other physicians had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle it was, for I did not cure him with ointment, because it was in a place where ointment or any medicine could not be found, but I placed two old towels over the wound twice a day and washed it frequently with honey water until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	 "But I will speak of two types of proper sutures according to the account of [name].
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	 And it is that you begin with the suture from the outside, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	 And so, as the needle penetrates the skin and through that same stitch, straight and long throughout the entire body, you leave the end of the thread in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the inside to the outside in the other extremity of the middle.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	 And when you have made that penetration, then you make the other penetration again in that same extremity of the middle from the outside to the inside; and leave the end of the thread which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other extremity from the inside to the outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	 And make that penetration with that same thread, with which you have made all the previous penetrations, into the end of the thread that is on the inside.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	 And then begin from this same side and sew with that end of the thread on the other side, and extract the needle from the skin that has been penetrated, and then return that to the skin and sew the end of the thread that is on the other side with this end of the thread; and extract that from the skin that is on the patient's side.  /> And now you have two stitches made in this manner: one from outside to inside and the other from inside to outside, with each end of the thread being secured on either side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	 And do this one time and another, and do it one time near another time until you remove everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	 And the summary of this method of suturing is that you should sew with a skin stitch with which you sew the hairs, so that you sew one time from the side of the end of the thread and leave that other time until it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	 However, the second type of suture, which they call Wallia, and this is its method and thus I recommend it, is that you sew with a half-thread stitch with which some doctors sew, so that they bring all parts to their corresponding part according to nature; and they apply the end of one thread and the end of the other to the opposite end of the thread, and this is done as I have recommended to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	 Ensure that you place the needle in the end of the thread closest to your dominant hand outside the part, and make it penetrate into the inside part in that single point, leaving two ends of the thread; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside at two points of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	 And then turn those cushions, and make each one penetrate from the inside part of the body to the outside part in two opposite extremities of the mentioned area.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	 And this manner of suturing is better than the common light suture, and it is the suture for which preceding mention was made.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	 This is the speech of Galen
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	 And others may say that suturing the abdomen is done with two needles, so you insert a thread into each one of them, and begin by inserting the needle on the side where you should, and make it penetrate to the other side according to the suture method used for equal hearts.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	 And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, then its suture is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	 But the judgment of wound treatment is the same as that for other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	 This is because when you get a fresh wound with its blood before the air alters it, and return the intestines to their place and suture it properly, then place over it carnivorous powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 And if the air has already altered the wound, then place on that wound thick ointments which are at your disposal until they form a hard crust and close the wound; and ensure it is cured and well monitored; and then treat it in the same way as other wounds until it heals.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	 But if the necessary medicines are not present, then apply this promptly as soon as it starts to ooze pus and blood, changing it two times a day, as you have been taught, until it heals. This is because in simple wounds no other preparation is needed besides bandaging them properly.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	 But if you fear that the wound may affect the main members, then it is necessary for you to soak wool in high-quality oil or rosemary oil and place it around the joints between the ribs and under the armpits.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	 And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, which often happens, then treat it with black henbane steeped in wine, especially if the putrefaction has penetrated into the cavity of the intestine.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	 And know that the one which is of the large intestine is of lighter healing than the one which is in the subtle intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	 And it is difficult to heal because the intestine that is called "gallbladder" does not receive healing from any wound that falls upon it; and this is due to the great number of veins in it and their magnitude, and the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	 But if that which proceeds from the wound is the flesh, and you obtain that part fresh, reduce it according to your skill with which you reduce the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	 But if it has passed into the space and is already turned green or black, then you should strengthen that with honey on the place that is discolored by it, so that blood flow will come, for in the flesh there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	 And then you should cut out that which is another lament, and place two ends of the honey hanging from the exit of the wound, so that the attraction of it will be relieved upon you, and for the holding of the flesh and the emission of the branch of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	 "Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestines.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	 When a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible to restore it in some men, because I have seen that person who was struck in their stomach with a lance thrust, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound had become an old fistula, and from him there came out intestines and wind.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	 Therefore, I proceeded with his treatment, not that he was not yet cured, but I continued to care for him until the inside had been healed and the area was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	 And I, having seen the area already consolidated, ordered that the patient should expect some misfortune in his stomach; and no one expected any misfortune, and he was eating and drinking in his usual manner, and then he entered the bath and was exercised as prescribed.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	 And some experienced people said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be tied in this manner: and that is to take large-headed ants; and then bring together the two lips of the wound and place one ant from those which has its mouth open over the two lips of the wound; so that when it bites on them it strengthens its mouth, and cuts off its head, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	 And then place another ant near the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants, placing them one after another according to the entire area of the wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	 And then sew up that [area] and close the wound, and let those attached heads remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	 And it is possible that the intestine be tied with thin thread made from the attached animal intestine, because it is more like a needle; and you should take the end of this intestinal thread and make sure it is very clean, then tie its end with another piece of thread, wrap it around, and then insert that thread through needles and sew the intestine with it, reducing it in the rupture.  [This passage describes a technique for surgically repairing an intestinal perforation or hernia.]
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	 And this method of suturing with ants is not anything more than a way of trust and hope. [This passage suggests that the use of ants for wound closure was not a reliable or proven technique.]
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	 But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, for then it is only a slight cut, and it will not heal completely. [This passage explains that certain wounds, particularly those in the thin intestines, are too severe to be closed with ants and will not fully heal.]
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	 "About the treatment of hemorrhoids and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	 "Know that any sore or abscess that becomes old and chronic, forming an ulcer that does not heal and keeps growing over time without being cut open, is universally called a fistula regardless of which limb it is on. We call this hemorrhoids.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	 "And a fistula in truth is a knotty, hard, white growth with no pain associated, and it has a cavity like the cavity of a bird's bone; and because of this, that ulcer is named 'rizatz', which means 'bone marrow'.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	 "And there are in some people a moist ulcer that grows over time; and very quickly the moisture is removed within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	 "And sometimes this moisture moves, and it is scarce, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	 "And I have already said in the division, that is, when I said about sores, that every ulcer which is not healed and is not raw flesh is not so except for one of these nine causes: one cause is either due to a lack of blood in the body; or due to the poor quality of the blood; or because between it and the lips there is hard flesh preventing the growth of new flesh; or because it moves lightly; or because that ulcer itself is rotten and the substance next to it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used for its treatment is inappropriate; or when corruption occurs in the region, causing an infection; or due to the nature of the region, as is the case in Zaragoza, where digestion of illnesses is difficult and slow, and therefore the natural healing of abscesses is delayed; or because there is one bone, or many bones, present.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	 "Already all those causes, and the signs of them and their cures with medicines are explained in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	 "And it is fitting that I make you know the cure for the fistula which is caused by surgical operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	 "And know that fistulas can occur in all the members of the body, for there are fistulas that reach large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the bladder, or the intestines, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or some of the joints composed like those of the hand and foot; and these are those that give proximity to the principal member and resemble it.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	 "Therefore, among these fistulas, those of this kind are among the most difficult to heal diseases, and they do not receive a cure, and dealing with them is work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	 "And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach these places that have been mentioned, and you expect and hope for its cure, and you wish to come to knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight, explore it with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	 If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a delicate lead probe, for lead, due to its lightness of body, is easily guided and curved according to the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	 But if the fistula has terrible growths, it is not within your power to investigate it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	 Therefore, irrigate the orifices one by one, for the moisture with which you irrigate will also pass through the other orifices and run out of them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	 And then inquire very carefully, as far as it is possible for you to know, whether here there are bones or nerves, and whether the cavity of the fistula is deep or close at hand; if it is a fistula with many orifices that appears entirely under your power, use your inquiry along with all your strength, with your investigation of the patient, and discover the cause of the pain through your pressure with your hand on the area, and consider the signs and accidental causes of the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	 And when you have stood firm on all these causes with true understanding, then proceed to the treatment with confidence: and that is, consider whether the fistula appears near or far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I have mentioned to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And then you dry the fistula as previously described in the patient's narrative, and remove whatever is in that filtration and of rotting flesh, and whatever has grown in the orifices of the flesh, whether it be pus or similar substances, and cure the inside so that it may heal.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	 But if the fistula is of great depth, and according to the straight path, then it is necessary that you insert that [tool] into the wound as deeply as possible, and then cleanse it of all its rotting flesh; and then administer cloths wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have enclosed with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	 And do this several times until the sharp medicine has dissolved everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	 And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it heals.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	 But if it does not heal from this, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	 But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of this, then you should probe it and dry it as we have recommended, unless you encounter any cause such as a vein or a nerve or a main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	 "However, if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption or blackening in it, then you should scrape that area until all of the corruption is removed; and then treat it with water to help it heal.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	 "And if it does not heal and continues to discharge in the same way, then you should know that you have not completely eradicated all of the corruption; therefore, you must uncover it again and perform a more careful and thorough cleansing of it with the strongest force available, and then restore that area.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	 "And thus, if it heals, that is good; but if not, then you should know that this corruption is in the deepest recesses of the body, which cannot be reached, and therefore you are powerless to do anything about it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	 "And if the bone is slightly corrupt and you are able to remove it, then do so using fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	 "And if there are many bones, then you must carefully remove all of them, and leave not even a trace of any with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	 "However, if any cause of humidity gives you difficulty, and there is no fear or mistake in the incision, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	 Sure, let's translate this sentence line by line:
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	 Here's the line-by-line translation:
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	 Based on the pattern you've provided and my understanding of medieval medical texts, here's a line-by-line translation:
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	 Based on the pattern and vocabulary used in the previous text, here's my attempt at translating this line:
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	 A young man around 30 years old experienced pain in his chest, and from the inner parts, an abscess formed within the body until the abscess reached the chest, and it is a case of a large abscess, with no external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	 And so the time was extended with that [abscess] due to the error of the doctors until the abscess burst, and various substances were discharged from him. His treatment was then stopped until his thigh was made into a fistula, and in him there appeared orifices that all secreted pus and the humors of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	 And then a multitude of doctors cared for him for about two years, and none of them knew more than the art, until I was called upon.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	 And I saw his thigh and the substances that flowed from him through those large orifices; and the body of that man was all swollen, and his color was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	 And then I inserted a probe into one of those orifices, and the probe reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	 And then I probed all the orifices and found that they extended from all parts of the thigh.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	 And then I cut and incised into one of those orifices, and I discovered a section of bone that was corrupt, blackened, and rotten; and already a portion of the thigh was corrupt where it had penetrated to the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	 And then I sawed off what was revealed and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	 And I believed that it was not in the bone itself but rather the corruption which I had cut out and sawed off, and I had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	 And then I applied healing ointments to the wound for a long time, but it did not heal.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	 And then I probed and further exposed the bone according to the initial discovery, and I found that the corruption continued with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	 And I sawed off what appeared to be from that corruption, and then I was forced to abandon the treatment and healing of it, as it did not heal.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	 And then I exposed it again and did not cease to incise the bone little by little, particularly, and forced its healing, but it did not heal until I incised around a palm's width of it, from which I extracted the marrow. Then I healed that part with medicines, and it was lightly consolidated and cured.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	 And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and incision of him except for the disposition of his fragility and the scarcity of his tolerance and his fear of death, because lethargy befalls him at all hours due to an excess of poor evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	 Therefore, he is healed through complete healing, and there is nothing hard or bony left; the disposition of his body has been well-done and his strength returns; he can move about without any problems or harm in any regard.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	 But if there is bone protruding from the already injured part of the body, then you should cut it like this: take a strong linen bandage and tie it tightly around the protruding bone at its extremity; have someone pull on the other end of the bandage to stretch it out; then wrap a thicker woolen bandage over the first bandage; then press down on the flesh that is beneath the bone, extending the extremity so that you pull the flesh apart and expose the flesh in the area where you want to saw, so that the saw does not cut into the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	 And place a stick or board underneath the bone securely, for when you do this, it is not permitted that the saw cuts into the corrupt flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	 And it is necessary that the locking be done little by little on the affected area, because if it is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, then another lock will be needed for him at another time.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	 And if the bone is not prominent and there are two affected parts close to each other, or the corruption is in the middle of them, then you should uncover all the flesh from both parts; and then place a stick under [them], and then saw the one from the first part until the sawing reaches the second part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	 And let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	 And if the corruption is in the joint, cut open that corrupt joint, and saw the bone where it connects to the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	 And if the corruption is in the connection between two joints, then it is not reasonable but ingenious.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	 And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is very difficult; however, you must seek to understand how the corruption appears to you, and cut away that part, and clean it according to whatever method is possible for you, and with each ingenious device rectify it as best you can, when there is no vein or nerve in opposition.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	 And you should know that the incisors and saws used for cutting these bones are tools according to the position of the bones, their preparation, size, delicacy, largeness, smallness, hardness, and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare all types of suitable instruments for each operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	 And know that this operation depends on you regarding the type of instrument you need; since you have great study, experience, and knowledge in the ways of this art, and are familiar with various diseases, you should apply what is appropriate from the instruments for each disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	 And I, having taught you at the end of this chapter, will list the instruments that you will use as simple tools with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experiment on others.
Forma de serra:	 Shape of a saw:
Forma de autra serra:	 Another shape of a saw:
Forma de autra serra:	 Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	 Large shape of another saw:
Forma de ray:	 Shape of a file:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	 Its head should be in the shape of a star-headed nail, and its points should be like the points of an awl.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	 And it is not advisable to rub only with cold water the heads of the joints when they are inflamed, or if the opening is very large.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	 A larger form of razor compared to others
Forma de razori menor:	 A smaller form of razor
Forma de razori lat:	 A flat form of razor
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	 A well-made saw with a curved shape above the iron part, and the wooden handle is also well-made.
Forma de lu:	 Its shape
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 A form of razor that has a concavity
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 Another thin form of razor
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 A curved-tip razor
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 A small, tentacle-like razor
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 The form of an incisor used for cutting bones
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 Another smaller form of incisor
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 The shape of another incisor; this one resembles a saw, with its tip like a blade, and is used in many places on the bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 The shape of a saw that is suitable for cutting through bones
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 And its tip is triangular and has a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	 It is made of Indian iron, and similarly, it should meet all the requirements we have mentioned for razors, incisors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	 "About the extremities and the locking of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	 "The extremities can be injured by intrinsic or extrinsic causes. If you have treated the corruption with those medicines and the treatment does not work, sometimes the corruption may go to a member that has not been affected by any cause. Then it is necessary for you to incise that member until the place where the corruption is located, so that the patient can avoid death or great harm to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	 "And the sign of one who has this happen is that the member turns black, as if fire had burned it, or you may see the blackness spread to other members until the whole body is affected; and thus you should diagnose this with an incision.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	 "Similarly, if the corruption is caused by a strike from some venomous things, such as a sea scorpion or viper or rat, and so forth.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	 "And if the corruption or strike is in the extremity of the finger, then you should incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread to the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	 And similarly, if you approach the hand, then cut it from the back of the forearm, and do not allow corruption until it takes hold in the arm's forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	 And if you cut that off, then cut the arm at the elbow joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	 And if the corruption passes and goes around the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and administering any other remedy for that condition is a waste of effort.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	 And similarly, do the same with the foot when corruption reaches the top of the foot, then cut it off at one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	 And if it spreads to the sole of the foot, then you should cut off the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	 But if it ascends into the shin, then you should cut the leg at the knee joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	 And if the corruption has already spread over the shin, then in that case there is no hope but to let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	 And the manner of cutting off or sawing the member is that you should tighten a ligature above where you want to cut, and tie another ligature over the spot; and let the assistant extend a ligature below the parts, and let the assistant place another ligature above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligatures until it is entirely exposed; and then it should be cut off or sawed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	 And it is necessary that a cloth be placed over all parts so that the healthy area does not touch and that the injured patient receive an accurate incision and cautery.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	 But if blood flows when you operate, then cauterize the area carefully, or place some powder that restrains the bleeding on it; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then bind the afflicted member with an appropriate bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	 And I advise you that if you encounter this in a man's foot, the accident which I and you have discussed, which is when he feels darkness in his foot from the burning, similar to the burning of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	 And that corruption first occurs in the toe until it affects the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	 And then that man prepares for himself some pus, which goes to the cure of the member with great vehemence, and it consumes that foot up to the joint, and he becomes cured.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	 For a long time, that same corruption occurs in the toe of his left hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	 And then he came to me, and I resolved to expel that superfluity with water that I poured over the hand of medicines, so that the body of him was cleansed; but the superfluity was not expelled and began to go to the other toe until it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	 And since he has recovered from me, he has returned to his land and it was reported to me that the man has prepared and healed his entire hand.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	 I have included this account only to serve as guidance on this disease, and to be a sign by which it may be identified and accordingly treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	 On the care of sinews and the quality of enema with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	 When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is extended until it collects pus, and then it breaks and ruptures, and the pus comes out, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it is also like a thin cloth, and it has not reached deeper corruption, and does not touch the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinew, and not a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	 However, if the space is extended until it touches some corruption in a member, then it is called a fistula and not sinew.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	 And its treatment is that you should cut off all that skin just as it has been rolled up, especially when it is thin and like a cloth, and make sure that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	 Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	 And consider the abdomen, and if it is large, and the arm that you have is foul-smelling, then enema that area with Egyptian medicine which is made of oil, vinegar, and honey in equal parts, and mix them in a vessel, and heat them over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	 Then take from him the amount of water necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and enema him with that in his abdomen, and strengthen his orifices, and let the medicine act on him for the duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	 Then extract it with a probe; and do this for as many days until the abdomen is cleansed and the odor is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	 And sometimes he is enemaed with ashes water, when this medicine is not available to you; and it is that you take the ashes of vines, and put water on them; and then strain that and enema him with it until you are sure that his abdomen is cleansed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	 And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ashes water, then enema him with water and honey mixed with a little vinegar, and enema him with vinegar and honey mixed together, because it is the nature of honey to cleanse and wash, and the vinegar binds the abdomen, especially when in the vinegar there is an excess of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	 And when you do this several times and realize that the swelling has subsided, then irrigate him with water that promotes the growth of flesh in him.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	 And take some of the ointment called diafinicon and dissolve it in rose oil and vinegar; or irrigate him with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	 And if the opening of the swelling is too narrow to admit the canula for irrigation, then you should widen it little by little with a hot iron, and place in it a garlic clove wrapped in Egyptian ointment or Basilicum ointment until it is widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	 Similarly, if the opening is too wide, then you should bring together its lips with a stitch and leave it in that state for as long as is necessary for the irrigation without addition.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	 And if the opening from which the arm hangs is elevated above the parts below it, then dry that with a poultice in the lowest part of it so that the arm may go back inside, for when the arm is constricted by the swelling, flesh will be generated in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	 And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the bone by draining pus, then prepare the member with the preparation that allows the arm to move lightly as it seems appropriate and there should be no retained cause in the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	 And take consolidating medicines that are placed on the sinus for what you want, extend those (medicines) over a cloth of linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	 And let the cloth be of such a large quantity that it covers all the sinuses; and then cut with scissors on the right side of the orifice of the sinus an opening wider than the orifice by a little, and extend over another piece of linen from the ointments the lion's share according to the size of the opening, and place it over that for a long position of the orifice of the sinus so that the issuance of the arm from him is relieved and do not remove the large cloth except approximately once every few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	 But that which is on the orifice of the sinus, you should always keep it there so that what is blocked in his arm may be released.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	 And to know if what comes out of his arm is much or little, or if it is digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	 And with this, you should consider the area of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess present.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	 And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that has been deposited on the opening of the sinus already adheres or begins to adhere more firmly, then on the second or third day you should separate the skin, and when you separate the wound, replace the cloth with another one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	 But if from the sinus comes out a small amount of subtle fluid, then do not despair about its adherence, for its healing is proper. For there are some people in whom the growth of flesh in their wounds takes longer, and likewise there are those in whom the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	 And if from the sinus for several days comes out undigested food, then know that the sinus is not adhering; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you should aim to dry the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and virtue, they should be made dry as with ointment diapalma, when there is an excess of the addition of egg yolk.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	 And the most effective remedy for the one who is being treated is to take some of the ointment called difenicon, dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it on the wound as an ancient salve. Then complete this process with him and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	 And already act in that way when the arm is broken: take ointment called difenicon and mix it with wax until it becomes thick, then use it; or take myrrh, aloe, and cinnamon, grind them all into a powder and sprinkle over the wax while heating on the fire, then lay it out on a cloth and strengthen that over the wound; and lay that with the wax you have mixed until it becomes thick, and sprinkle it on a cloth and strengthen that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	 And sometimes it is administered to him with long-haired aristolochia and lily celestial roots (and it is lily celestial), and wild oat flour and centaurium, and use these simple or compound ingredients: grind them, sift them, and sprinkle the powder over the wax you have mixed; then use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	 And if the wound is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then know that the corruption is in his flesh, and make an inquiry into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then treat him with fistula treatment, as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	 Based on the context and similarity to Latin, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	 Panarici is an abscess that forms under the nail of the finger or toe, and it quickly spreads to other fingers or toes. When it becomes prolonged, its treatment is less valued, or it can become an abscess from an abscess, or it can become corrupted, throwing pus into the nail bed, quickly corrupting the entire nail, and eventually reaching the bone, causing a foul odor. The end of the finger turns black, and its color becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	 Therefore, when you have treated the affected area as we have said in the division and your treatment is not working, then it is necessary for you to cut away with iron all the superfluous parts that remain of the nail and then cauterize the wound accordingly, because cautery is very helpful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the protruding parts of the nail are already compressing the flesh within and begin to prick and hurt it, then it is necessary that you place a thin piece of linen under the corner of the nail that hurts the flesh, push the flesh out and cut it easily; then apply corrosive medicines on what remains of the flesh until everything is removed; and then treat that with ointments until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	 If the corruption has already spread to the bone, then you must cut out that bone and remove it, because no time will heal if the bone is corrupt.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you see the corruption and decay spreading to the fingers, then cut off that finger at one of its joints according to the customary method, and then care for it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	 But if there is a blow or crush to the nail, and intense pain results from it, then you should first bleed the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula by making a transverse cut at its base, being careful that the cut does not reach the flesh below the nail, for this will cause the patient intense pain and will be the cause of excessive growth of the adjacent skin in that place; and then treat that area with water that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	 But this excessive growth, which is common in the hands of many men, is very painful in all its parts, and very painful in the bones or in the nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	 And some of them are born at the base of the joint, or their growth is in some of the aforementioned joints.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	 Sure, let's translate the text line by line:
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	 "And of those who are born fleshy, the incision is light, and it is that you must make the incision with a Latin spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	 "But of those born into the narrowness of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, beware of their incision.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "But in the case of those born with knuckles, you must first make a round incision into the flesh at the beginning, near the bone, and then cauterize it with one of those appropriate irons for this purpose, so that it may be healed from within.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	 "But consolidation that occurs in the said joints due to birth defects or injuries, whether by fire burn or similar causes, then you must cut through this consolidation until the joints return to their natural shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	 "And then place between their bandages of infused oil so that they are not easily consolidated, and separate them with a thin lead sheet until it is consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	 "And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some of these with the palm, then you should cut that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	 Certainly! Let's break down the text step by step:
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	 Based on the context and the patterns observed in the previous lines, here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	 This sentence describes two different methods for treating a patient who has been wounded by an iron object. The first method involves making incisions and removing the black blood, while the second method requires raising the vein and extracting all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	 And then tie it [the bandage], and command the patient to abstain from eating black bile-producing foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	 And repeat the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are full, and this will be noted by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	 But their elevation should be done in this manner: you who are treating the patient's leg, if there are hairs on it, first shave the hair off; then bathe the leg in hot water until it becomes red and the veins become swollen; or if there is no bath present, have the limb exercised vigorously until it becomes numb.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	 And then dry the cord to the right of the vein by incision in the shank or the back of the calf, or in the lower part towards the heel.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	 And then open the cord with scissors and peel away the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and this perception is that which those who practice this request by turning black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	 And so when you see the white thread coming out of the cord, you know it is a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	 And then place that thread under until it is lifted and thrown out of the cord, and suspend that with an empty needle.  (The phrase "orp leon" seems to be a mistake or corruption; the intended phrase might have been something like "am una linea", meaning "with a string".)
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	 And then make another incision near that one for three fingers' width, and then cut the cord of the separated part above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	 And then raise it and incise it in the posterior cut towards the heel, and then extract it and raise it until it comes out through the second cut, and then extract it from the cut that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	 And do this until you extract it from the highest or most superior cut of all, until it is completely removed; and then incise that part.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	 And if it does not obey you and cannot be extracted and raised, then insert a double-pointed needle with a strong thread and tie it off, and extract it, or insert a reed and move your hand in all directions until it is ejected.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	 And be careful not to cut it; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to raise that part and it will come back upon the patient with that harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And when you have completely removed it, then place over the wound site wool soaked in oil and undiluted oil, and treat it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	 And if the bladder is contracted with tortuousness in which there are wrapped parts and it is not straight as we have said, then you should cut along its entire length of tortuosity and at the wrapped places. Then suspend it by hooks until you lift it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	 And be careful with your section so that you do not cut the vein and do not harm it, for it will be difficult for you to lift it; and preserve your skill in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	 Shape of the incision used to cut the bladder:
Forma de unci orp:	 Shape of a hook:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	 It is not sharp like a hook nor does it have a pointed tip so that the vein is not harmed; and it should be thick and flexible, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; there should be an extra thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	 Of the extraction of a vein from the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	 This vein originates in the thighs in hot lands, such as in the region of Al-Andalus in the land of Arabs and in the hot and dry lands of India with little moisture, where there is neither grass nor trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	 And this pain can also be generated in other parts of the body besides the hips.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	 And its origin in him is putrefaction, which comes from the intestines like snakes and worms that generate inside the body, causing ulcers and worms between the intestines and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	 And the sign of its coming is this: that there appears in the thigh a violent inflammation, and then the place becomes blistered; and then the vein begins to come out from that blister, like a root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	 And when its tip appears, then you should wrap around it a lead weight that weighs between one and two pounds, secure it in place, and let the lead hang from the thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	 And each time you see any part of it coming out for some reason, wrap that part in lead and secure it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	 And if it is prolonged, then cut off a part of it and wrap the remaining part; do not cut it straight away until it has come out, because if you cut it while it is still inside, it will contract and enter into the flesh, causing an abscess and putrefaction in that place and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	 Here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	 And from this vein, it has emerged in some men that it is in its length of five palms and ten, and already it has come to my attention that one has emerged of twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	 And if it has been cut during the time of treatment, then insert the ray into its opening and make a long hole through to the body, until all that is in the matter has been evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; then cure it with the remedy for apostemes. 	(Note: "apostemas" refers to abscesses or boils.)
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	 And this vein sometimes has many branches, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes to him with many openings, and it emerges from each opening as a branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	 And therefore cure it in the same way as we have said in the division, and with that which has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	 On the cutting of worms generated under the skin, it is called cattle sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	 This sickness is called in some lands cattle sickness because often it happens to cows and there are few worms, one of which is born between the skin and the flesh, and goes through the whole body ascending and descending, and shows its movement from member to member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	 And his condition is due to the putrefaction of some humors, similar to how worms, snakes, leeches, and roundworms infest the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	 And it is feared because of his malice, for when he goes into the body and reaches the head, and arrives at the eye, then he swiftly enters and destroys the eye, and this causes many troubles.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	 And therefore, when you want to cure him and remove him, it cannot be done unless you know his movement and appearance from the senses. Then you must hold strongly that which is above him and that which is below him with a bandage and tight constriction. And then dry it over him and extract him.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if he is lodged in the flesh and you cannot find him, then you place a cautery with fire over the area where he dwells until he dies. And the greatest cause of concern is his corruption, which corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	 But if you see him reaching the head near the eye, then hold the eyelid with a strong constriction, and dry it over him, and extract him; and it is necessary for the patient to use purifying medicines for the body that evacuate bad putrid humors, and he should avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	 Based on the given context and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, "De sectione super aegritudinem nafir" can be translated as follows:
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	 This malady is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in certain members, and it is often transferred from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	 And I have already seen the second thing that I will tell you about.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	 I was called to see a sick woman in a village, and after she removed her blouse, I saw a small inflammation on the main vein of her arm. After an hour had passed, I saw that inflammation move as if it were a worm going upwards, but more gently than being a flea, as if it were live silver moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	 And then the pain moved from that location and settled in the muscle, and it stayed there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	 And then it ran through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	 And then she reported to me that it was running through her whole body as I saw, and I was greatly amazed at the change in it and its speed from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	 And I had already seen something like this before in my own hands, but I had never seen pain itself being transferred from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	 "But I do not see this similarly in women.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	 "And I do not think it is anything other than the fact that the woman was old, with thin bodies and exposed veins, and in this condition she felt that swelling.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	 "And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this treatment in those who are delicate and with moist veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	 "And when you want to treat him, and the patient feels that pain, then it does not appear to the eye as we have said; then you strengthen over that area and leave it lightly and briefly until the swelling has subsided, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	 "But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat that [patient] with purging of the body and with things that expel swellings, and cure him with stinking pills and with serpentine pills.
De extraccio de sagetas.	 "About the removal of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	 "Arrows are varied according to their types and the places of the body where they strike, for their diversity is that some have large tips, small ones, concave ones, dull ones, solid ones; and others have three angles, and some have tongues, while others have barbs.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	 And that which concerns the members and the places in which it falls is according to two ways: for the members or their principal causes are like the brain, the heart, and the liver, and the lungs, and the kidneys, and the intestines, and the bladder, and their likenesses; and therefore when something falls into one of these members and appears to you as a sign of death, which cause I will now explain to you, then it is necessary for you to avoid extracting that arrow from him in whom death occurs in the highest dispositions, and when these evil signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract it and heal the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	 And of the signs of death when an arrow falls on him and pierces the bone, and exits through the fontanel which is above the brain, for it happens by a sudden and violent attack, and fainting, and vertigo, and heat in the eyes, and inflammation and heat of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile, and his speech is cut off strongly, and his voice is destroyed, and from the place of the wound comes out white moisture resembling dust, and his eyes resemble the wateriness of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	 And therefore, if these signs appear to you, then you should abstain from the treatment and removal of the arrow, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	 But the signs of an arrow hitting the heart are as follows: it is close to the left breastbone, and you can feel that it has struck something hard, not soft; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse, and black blood runs from the wound, and coldness in the extremities, and foaming at the mouth, and fainting; and thus know that death is certain.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	 And the signs when an arrow has struck the lung are: foaming of blood from the wound, and the veins near the neck are swollen, and there is a change in the patient's color, and they take short, quick breaths, and ask for cold air to be drawn into their mouth.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	 And if the arrow strikes the diaphragm which is in the feet, then the pain is near the small ribs, and there is a great deal of pain with violent pain and sighing, and all the members are not well at all.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	 And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then food will come out of the wound that has not been digested.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	 And if the arrow is embedded in the abdomen and remains inside, there should be some opening of the wound or the fabric, or the intestine that has been torn, and there is no hope for the patient's recovery without removing the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	 And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine is exiting, and there are any signs of infection outside the body, and the patient experiences severe pain, then you should know that this condition is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	 However, the other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders and their attachments, the vertebrae of the back, the collarbone, the hip, the thighs, and similar parts of the body are saved according to the best methods when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery, and it is not a poisoned arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	 And I will tell you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand their treatment accordingly.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	 The reason for this is that I once treated a man who had an arrow lodged in his tear duct near the root of his nose. I removed it from the other side, leaving only the arrowhead behind his ear, and he recovered with no damage to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	 This sentence appears to describe the removal of an arrow from someone's eye, with specific details about the arrow and its condition. Here is a line-by-line translation:
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	 Based on the context and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a possible translation for the given sentence:
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	 And I extracted another arrow from a man called Crestia, which had been shot into his throat. It was an Arabic arrow and it is the one with golden shafts; then I cut into that area between two veins, as it was submerged in his throat; then I carefully removed it with it, and then I extracted it, and thus Crestia was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	 And I extracted another arrow from a man which had been shot into his belly, and I thought he would die from it; and so, after thirty days passed and there was no change in his condition, I cut into the arrow and hooked it out, and he was healed, and no bad accident happened to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	 And I saw another man in whom an arrow was shot into his back, and the wound became infected on him. After about seven years, the arrow came out through the flesh of the wound.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	 And I saw a woman in whom an arrow was shot into her belly, and the wound became infected inside her, and there was no change in her condition at all, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	 And I saw another man into whom an arrow was shot in the face, and the wound became infected and the arrow broke, but he felt no pain, and similar things happened to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	 And you will extract the arrow from the man of the king's soldiers who was stuck in the middle of his nose and had deviated slightly to the right side, with the entire arrow hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	 And I was called to care for him soon after the arrow entered three days ago.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	 And then I found the arrow's wound very narrow; and then I inquired about it with a fine probe, and did not feel it; but he felt a prick near his right ear, and then I suspected that this prick was from the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	 And I plastered the area with an ointment containing attracting and digestive properties, expecting that the location would soften so that the arrow's position would become clear to me, causing it to dry out over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	 And no significant accident occurred in that location which would indicate that the arrow had reached there; and I continued with the ointment on it for many days, and no accident occurred; and the wound had healed over time, and the patient recovered from the extraction for several days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and told me this.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	 And then I applied a sharp, corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it opened up. With a probe, I searched for it and found the tip of a subtle arrow, which was attached to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	 And then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow became visible to me, and it passed through for a period of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	 And after the wound was widened and I was able to insert forceps into it, and it remained in that state without any obstruction, then I did not cease to refine and devise various methods for it until one day I managed to extract it using finely made forceps, as will be described later in this chapter. And after that, I restored the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	 And although some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, I restored it and the wound healed, and the patient was cured completely without any setbacks.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	 And I recount to you the methods of extracting some arrows so that you may understand and learn what has not been said, for the principles of this art and its definitions cannot be understood through mere narrative nor can they be learned from books alone.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	 This sentence is discussing the work of skilled artisans and their comparison between the present and absent states, as well as their discovery of new operations and instruments to deal with external causes affecting their craft. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	 And thus I say that arrows are not removed from the members in which they are embedded except by two methods: either by attracting the place where they enter, or by pulling on the opposite side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	 And that which is thrown into the place where it enters, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy part, and is pulled out and removed.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	 And if it does not obey the extraction at the time when it is caught, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh around it softens, and its attraction and exit are facilitated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	 Similarly, if it is embedded in bone and does not obey your extraction, then leave it for some days and repeat this with attraction and moisture each day, until it is removed.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	 And if it does not obey your extraction after some days, then you must pierce the area around the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine awl until the place is widened by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	 And if the arrow is embedded in the skull and has entered one of the ventricles of the brain, and it appears that the patient suffers from any of these symptoms which I have mentioned, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it until its presence becomes equal after some days; for if the arrow reaches the cipher, then death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	 And if the arrow is embedded only in the body's bone and does not penetrate the vital organs, and the patient remains for several days without experiencing any of those complications, then you should focus on extracting the arrow and relieving the patient's discomfort.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 But if the arrow does not obey your attempt at removal, then you should administer topical treatments around the arrow as we have recommended, and subsequently care for the area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	 However, if the arrow is hidden within the body and cannot be felt, then you should investigate with a probe. If you feel it, then use various instruments appropriate for its removal.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	 And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound or the length of the shaft, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins in the way, then you should make an incision on the wound until it is wide enough to remove the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	 And if the arrow is lodged in the ears, then you should cut away the flesh around it from all sides with all the skill you can muster; and work on that, until you can free the arrow by cutting through the ear cartilage and twisting it out.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	 And if you cannot do it at that moment, then let the patient rest for some days until the affected areas can be relieved, and then repeat the treatment when they are alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	 But if there is an opposing flow of blood, then administer the remedy mentioned in its respective chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	 And be careful not to cut into a vein, nerve, or tendon, and administer the remedy in all possible ways to avoid the arrow; and do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and steadiness as I and you have agreed upon.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	 Therefore, perform the procedure opposite to the arrow's path, so that the patient matches the figure according to which you should insert the arrow in them, as this is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	 But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	 But if the arrow has been dislodged from the opposite side of the affected part, or if any part has already protruded from the wound site, or if the tip of the arrow is swollen due to the presence of a foreign body above the cord, then you should apply pressure on that area; and let the incision be made according to the size in which the forceps can grasp; and then remove it, as it has been made lightly for extraction.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	 Here's the translation of the provided sentence:
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	 And if not, leave that for some days, and then repeat it until it works.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	 If the arrow's shaft is still in there, then you should remove it along with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	 But if the shaft has broken off and you want to administer an incision, then you should introduce that [instrument] into the wound, making it convex so that the concavity of the instrument fits around the end of the arrow, and then remove it along with it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	 But if the arrow is barbed, then you should remove it using a strong instrument that goes deeply into the wound, because the arrow is lodged there.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	 And if the arrow is poisoned, then you should scrape away all the flesh in which the venom is located, if possible, and then treat it with the appropriate remedy.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And if the arrow hits the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible to cut over it, then cut over it, taking care not to cut a vein or nerve, and remove the arrow, and then sew up the wound if necessary, and treat it until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	 Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled out:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	 Their tips are like the beak of a bird, made with teeth similar to a saw, which grip onto the arrow to prevent it from slipping out.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	 And from these are made many species, large, few and thin, according to the size of the arrow and its narrowness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	 The form of the concave end of this hollow tip is like a bird's feather, to facilitate the entry of the arrow into it, and to push out the other end.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	 Form of the blunt end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	 like a tooth, to facilitate its entry into the hollow arrow and be pushed out with it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	 Of phlebotomy of veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	 The veins for phlebotomy are 32 in total, of which there are 16 in the head. These include two pulsating veins near the ears, called alhasisain; two veins on each temple; and two veins on each lacrimal of the eyes, known as aspicientz. There is also a vein in the middle of the forehead, one at the tip of the nose, two jugular veins at the neck, two veins above the upper lip, two below the lower lip (these are called algelic), and two veins under the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	 Certainly! Let's translate the provided medieval medical text line by line:
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	 The healing of veins that are near the ears is for ancient catarrhs and migraines, and old ulcers on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	 And the method of bleeding those veins is as I will explain to you: It should be done at the top of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed in the occipital region where both veins are located with a wide cloth and good friction; Then bind the patient's head tightly with a bandage so that both [veins] and their locations are near the ears on two depressed areas of the head; And you will seek them with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those [veins] with your finger, this is the sign to attempt [the bleeding].
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	 Then you take the lancet, and it is sharpened, and then you insert that under the vein until the blade reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	 And then raise your hand with the vein and the skin above it, and incise the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	 And let the length of the incision be approximately the width of two fingers, or around that; and allow as much blood to come out as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And then strengthen with poultices and let it heal inside.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	 And already in the beginning of this book, I have mentioned them and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	 But of the two arterial veins in the temples, the one that helps with bloodletting is for chronic migraines and severe headaches, and for frequent eye disorders, as well as acute swelling in the hands.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	 And the manner of bloodletting these veins is as I advise you: press on the patient's neck until the two veins can be felt by touch and are clearly visible; and then feel their pulse with your finger, and then you will know.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 Then you lift the skin over the vein with your index finger, and insert the bloodletting instrument underneath, and raise the vein up; and cut it as you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Then release the constriction on the patient, and place your finger over the vein for an hour, and then place a cloth and poultices over it, strengthening it with a strong bandage, and let it heal inside.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	 And already has been mentioned them, and of these the explanation, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	 And therefore the treatment of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic for ancient diseases of the face and for migraine, fever, and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And the nature of its phlebotomy is as I have told you; that is, let the patient tighten his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a "fossor," and this is what it looks like:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Place the point which is at the head of the fossor on that vein and strike it with a weight or with another cause in this manner, allowing the blood to run according to the amount you want; and then unbind the perforation from the patient and tighten it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	 And sometimes it is opened with a broad phlebotomy, but it does not matter that the phlebotomy is of an acute extremity as with other phlebotomies, instead it should be of a broad extremity, and let it be cut according to the transverse, because the bone is close and strong, it would break in the phlebotomy when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	 "But the treatment for the two veins that are in the corners of the eyes due to the itchiness of the eyes from heat and pus in the eyes, and for facial illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	 "And the way to perform bloodletting is for the patient to hold their head with a bandage, and then you perform bloodletting on them, while standing over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	 "And the bloodletting should be done along the length of the limb with small incisions, because there is little flesh in that area; and if the incision is too fine, the end of it will be easily torn.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 "And then let the blood flow as much as you need, and place a bandage on it, and hold it for one night, and then remove it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	 "But bloodletting from the nose vein is appropriate for acute fever and severe headache, as well as facial illnesses and migraines with heat in the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	 "And the way to perform bloodletting from it is for the patient to hold their head and then take their nose with your left hand, and take a fine long lancet and place it in the middle of the tip of the nose along its length, because the vein does not appear to be sensitive here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	 Certainly! Here's the translation for the provided text:
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	 Certainly! Let's translate the sentence line by line:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	 And the nature of this phlebotomy is that the patient lies down on each side with their hands tied behind their back; and let the surgeons be positioned above the patient's head, while the patient sits upright on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	 And then perform phlebotomy on the long vein with a wide phlebotomy knife little by little; and then extract blood in accordance with the determined quantity or according to how many times it is necessary for that; and then do the same with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	 And then untie the bindings and tightly bandage the two veins so that the patient is not weakened, and allow them to rest until morning when the wound has healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	 And the benefit of phlebotomy on the leg veins includes curing small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, evil ulcers and fissures, and evil ulcers that are on the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	 And the nature of this phlebotomy is that you make the patient sit before you, and tie their neck with a bandage, and then turn their lips inside out and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the indication of each is by the darkness of both, and this is because around them are small black veins; and then cut each with an incising cut.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	 If doubt exists within you and you do not know which of them it is, then you should proceed to incise the largest and most apparent of them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	 And make an incision in both veins that are located on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	 However, it is customary to cut both veins that are located on the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	 However, for the two veins that are below the tongue, phlebotomy is more appropriate at the cephalic vein, which is preferred for conditions of the uvula and other mouth diseases.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	 The method of phlebotomizing them is as follows: have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun, lift their tongue, and look underneath it; on one side you will see one vein and on the other side another vein, and each will be tending towards blackness in color.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	 Then bleed each one; and be careful not to finish with your hand on the bleeding of those, for below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And the veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those which are customary for all men, and their phlebotomy is done in two ways: either they place with the phlebotomy needle myrtle oil or olive oil subtly; or cut with a phlebotomy knife, and it is called thus: alnessil. And this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	 Based on the context provided and the similarity to medieval medical terms in Latin-based languages, I would translate "Forma de fleubotomi mirti" as follows:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	 Sure, let's try to translate the given sentence:
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	 This is the method of liver phlebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	 And this phlebotomy is of smaller size and more subtle extremity, suitable for phlebotomy of the small veins that contain refined blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	 But the advantage of phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins, is that it extracts blood from patients who are below the elbow and the collarbone, and from those whose feet and belly swell.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	 It is appropriate for the phlebotomist, when performing this phlebotomy, to be very careful and cautious, because below it there is an artery, and if he errs or presses too hard during the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood. Therefore, one should not perform this phlebotomy with a pointed fleam, but rather first cut with a scalpel.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then it is necessary for you to leave that place and move to another, or look for some branch of it; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm, because there it is clearly visible; and puncture it with a scalpel as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	 Sure, I'd be happy to help translate that sentence:
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	 And when you see, as you tighten the bandage, swelling in the area you have marked with a point, then that swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	 And if you see blood flowing in the phlebotomy like a child's urine, and the blood is thin and red, then know that it is from the artery; and then cut and press your finger on it for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the blood is stopped, because many times it will be stopped, then tighten the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	 And watch over the patient to prevent infection, and be concerned for him, and do not move him for several days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	 But if the blood does not stop, and you see that you have no remedy for this, then you should cut the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity is contracted, and the blood is stopped; or take a fistula scourer, and make it, and take one half and tighten that over the vein with stricture, decent bandage and wool until another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	 And then if the blood is cut off, it's good; otherwise, cure it with the water that preceded the memory of the place where the powder was cutting off the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	 And the severing of his blood is difficult in many arrangements due to the smallness of the wound and the possibility of the arm being bound.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	 However, venipuncture is beneficial for extracting blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalic [vein], as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	 And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be very careful during his phlebotomy because beneath that [vein] there is a nerve; and if he hits this nerve with the needle, a stupor will occur, and healing will be difficult, and perhaps he will not heal completely. And these nerves are often apparent in sensation; and if they are hidden in some people and are subtle and do not appear, then you should place the phlebotomy needle with which you are performing phlebotomy between the veins and avoid the nerve with your skillfulness.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	 "And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	 "The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and helps heal eye diseases.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	 "And it is particularly relevant in this case: if you want to perform phlebotomy, do so with an olive-shaped fleam or a myrtle-shaped one; for it is the safest of all veins, as there are no arteries or nerves left behind.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	 "However, you must ensure that when performing phlebotomy, you do not pierce the head of the lizard only, but rather seek a lighter place and do not touch it unless it is first discovered through percussion that there are some veins in that area for phlebotomy.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	 "However, it is very dangerous if there is an abscess in some men when they are not phlebotomized at the first percussion; but do not touch that abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	 "But the quality of this phlebotomy and its effects are important, in which you must consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	 "The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is administered only for the preservation of health and with hope for the patient's well-being, and to prevent illnesses from occurring. Phlebotomy should be performed on one of the three veins in the arm: cephalic, dark, or basilic. Phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring while fasting, or in autumn and winter near a meal when there are signs of fullness.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	 And if phlebotomy is performed on the third day or during the first few hours of the morning,
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	 And phlebotomy that is administered should only be done when it is convenient and necessary, whether by night or by day, at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	 And children should not be subjected to phlebotomy until they are fourteen years old; pregnant women should not undergo phlebotomy except between the fourth and seventh months; and those over sixty years of age should not be subjected to it either.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	 And if someone wants to be subjected to phlebotomy in any way, it is necessary that they clean their intestines before the phlebotomy with a cleansing enema, especially if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not expel the impurities of the intestines during the phlebotomy, which are corrupt and harmful to the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	 And patients with certain diseases such as seasickness or drunkenness should not be subjected to phlebotomy until the cause has been removed, nor those suffering from dropsy; and phlebotomy should especially be avoided in cases of colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, frequent coitus, labor, fasting, vigils, and all causes that weaken the virtue, whether bodily or mental.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	 And then carefully consider the humoral imbalance before that; if the blood is thick, use food and drink, and with medicines if it is necessary for that.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	 And then enter the bath if there are no contraindications, or exercise through some movement to make the blood thinner.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And perform phlebotomy on them at the end of the day, preferably around the third hour, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	 And ensure that the feet of the patient are protected from all animal accidents on that day, such as distress, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as work, excessive pain, sex, and their likenesses.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	 And at the conclusion, ensure that the causes are present in the use of which men commonly resort with aromatics and fragrances, as well as balms and similar items according to their availability.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	 And let the phlebotomist sit on a cushion that is higher than the one the patient sits on.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	 Then remove the patient's arm and rub it with your hand two or three times, phlebotomist. Then tighten the ligature with a cord and wrap it around two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	 And if the stricture is temperate, because when the stricture is not equal or there is excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or it is with softening, and then prohibit the body from excreting blood.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	 And concerning the stricture, it is necessary that he who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together until the veins are swollen and clearly visible to touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	 And the phlebotomist should anoint his instrument with a little oil beforehand; and he should place his index finger of his left hand over that vein, below the site where the phlebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein will move slightly, and the pulsation will cease. For some veins are like fleeing cords when you try to perform phlebotomy on them; they are those full of wind, and when you place your instrument over them, they contract and reveal the phlebotomist; and if the instrument does not open the vein, then it is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	 Therefore, for this reason, the phlebotomist should be careful and attentive to all these things.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	 And then you release the bloodletting tool, but if the vein is opened only once, then it's good; otherwise, you repeat this action a little lower than that place or on top of it with some urgency, if the place is not swollen.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	 And if the place is swollen or the patient becomes weak, then leave it for a day or two, and do not strengthen the bandage, because strong pulling will bring on more swelling, nor should they bathe.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	 And then repeat the bloodletting if needed.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	 And if the opening is small and blood flows slowly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out, then repeat the bloodletting in that hole according to correctness and narrow it slightly, and do this with some urgency before the place becomes swollen, because many people have a small opening.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	 But if you see that it is already swollen, then do not repeat [the procedure] on it, for it does not benefit you in any way; and place some oil-soaked linen on it, because it relieves the body of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	 And it is better to use oil in this case than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	 And similarly administer an oil-based incision in all cases of phlebotomy, with which we open the veins to prevent blood from flowing out of the body. This is done by applying terebinth, aloes, and sage when one of them is placed on the site, because the blood becomes attenuated and revolved when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	 And if a large abscess is formed at the site of phlebotomy, as sometimes happens, especially in those who have not been bled frequently, or when the vein is only slightly opened, then you should cut and place a sponge soaked in water and salt on the site for about an hour, because it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	 It is necessary to do this near the end of bleeding from that vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	 And if there remains any blackness or greenness in the area for several days, do not worry; and if you wish, place some dissolved aloes and myrrh on it, or some juice of mint, calamint, or a similar herb.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	 And many times such abscesses and swellings require phlebotomy from the basilica (vein).
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	 And so place your hand on that area, and if you find it soft, then press harder on that area, for this indicates something is wrong; and be careful not to apply too much pressure to that area as it may cause the blood from the artery to flow heavily.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And make an emplaster with water that has astringent properties, so that the area becomes hardened, and then care for it using other treatments until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	 And you should extract blood from each person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the prevailing color of the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	 Because if the blood is black, then let it continue to flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see that it is thick, then let it continue to flow until it becomes thinner; and likewise, if it is sharp, continue until the sharpness has passed.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	 And it is necessary for someone who is full and strong and requires a single bloodletting that the phlebotomy of the vein be large and the incision be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	 And for someone who is weak, do the opposite: let them be bled in many small quantities, and let the incision be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	 And the best practice in venipuncture is a transverse cut, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	 And this method of venipuncture is safe from excessive bleeding and nerve injury, and it is considered more commendable and safer than venipuncture according to length and width.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	 And if syncope is likely to occur during venipuncture, you should administer to the patient beforehand a small piece of bread soaked in mead or simple oxymel; and extract the blood from him in three or four doses.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	 And if there is coldness of the complexion, then before venipuncture give him bread soaked in honey syrup or spiced honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar things, or very aromatic and fragrant honey syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	 And if syncope occurs during venipuncture and is caused by the loss of too much blood, then he should drink meat broth and very fragrant honey syrup; and use aromatics with rosewater, and let his feet be anointed with it.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	 And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the section on syncope for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	 Certainly! Let's translate the given sentence line by line:
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	 Here's the translation for your sentence:
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	 "But if one wants to draw blood from the body, in the opposite direction of where it is accumulating, it is necessary that this be done on the second day or the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	 "But if there is a lot of blood in the body and it has been cut and causes fever, one must draw out all the blood at once and draw out a large quantity of it, and widen the opening until syncopation occurs, because you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on his pulse while drawing the blood, to prevent him from dying instead of fainting, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	 "And it is not necessary, when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, and the orifices of the vein have already closed and it has become difficult for the blood to come out, that you press on it with force and stretch it slightly, because this is very harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	 "Hold the lance in place until the blood has been evacuated; or use the sharpness of the lancet which has coagulated the blood in the vein's orifices; or place on it some dry theriac, or sage, and compress it lightly until the blood has come out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	 And if the vein is infected (or has formed an abscess), then let it be and do not touch it until the infection has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	 And if necessity compels you to bleed the patient, and there is no excuse not to, then bleed them in that spot or in the other arm on another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	 And the vein called "funis of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the cubital or basilic veins when they are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those (veins).
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	 And the manner of his phlebotomy is that the patient place their hand in hot water until the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	 Then it is tightly bound with a ligature midway up the limb; and then phlebotomized according to the smaller transverse vein, not longitudinally or along the length (of the vein).
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	 And let the incision be wide, and your phlebotomy with it over the joint of the hand slightly.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	 And if the flow of blood is blocked, then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you have achieved your goal.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	 If you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from the repetition of washing the hands in hot water, and instead the body is bathed in hot water during winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	 And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because after it there is no pulsating vein or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	 And the phlebotomy of the small saphenous vein on the right hand is beneficial for liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	 And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you strengthen the hand with a ligature or with your hand, after having placed it in hot water until the vein is inflated and well visible; then transverse phlebotomy is performed. If you incise it completely, there will be no harm.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	 And ensure that you do not complete the phlebotomy with your hand, because after it there are the nerves of the fingers denuded of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	 And then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the mouth of the vein, and its flow will be hindered.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	 And when the blood is extracted according to the necessary amount, then you place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not clot easily; similarly, you should do this for any narrow vessel.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	 However, the advantage of phlebotomy on the left arm is that it is beneficial for conditions related to the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	 Do likewise in phlebotomy from this side as you have done on the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	 And the benefit of phlebotomy from the saphenous vein is for conditions that are located below the torso, such as uterine disorders, menstrual retention, and similar conditions like ulcers and ancient sores on the thighs, and their related ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	 And the method for this phlebotomy is that the patient puts their foot in warm water and makes a friction on it until the veins appear; then tie the foot's joint with a ribbon; where the venous ramifications are seen, which are located on the sole of the foot, they branch out into the plantar surface of the foot like twisted roots.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	 Therefore, phlebotomize the largest vein below the thigh near the heel of the patient, because it is better and safer.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	 And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be cautious of the nerves that are beneath the surface of the foot. Perform your phlebotomy with the instrument you use for bloodletting, as if you were slicing through it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	 And let the bleeding vessels heal.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	 But if the flow of blood is not allowed; then you should immerse the patient's foot in hot water and let the blood run until it is drained.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then reapply with the lancet a little further up, because the area is sore; and do not fear the patient's malice, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	 And likewise, do the same with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	 And as for the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, in the hollow of the heel below the wild parsley root.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	 And the remedy for his bloodletting is to relieve the pain in the hip when it is due to excess blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	 And the quality of his bloodletting is that the patient enters a bath and wraps and binds his thigh tightly from the waist to the hip over the heel with a long, thin bandage so that it does not appear otherwise.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	 And therefore, when it appears, then you perform phlebotomy on that part according to each condition that is possible and according to the transverse vein, which is better; or incise it by incision or dry it by cautery, because the place of it is salty.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	 And it is very common in many men; and if you find that, and it does not appear throughout the whole [body], then perform phlebotomy on some of its branches, and this is the one that appears on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	 And beware of the nerves; and let the blood flow in the quantity that you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	 Then immediately release the constriction and place over the site of the phlebotomy cotton and strengthen the area, because it heals quickly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	 About cupping and the qualities of using those [methods].
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	 Cups are made of horn, or iron, or glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	 Cupping is done in two ways: one is with scarification and bloodletting, and the other is cupping without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	 And this type of cupping that is without scarification is done in two ways, because it is either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	 And ventozation should only extract blood from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and in this way it does not catch the virtue through them, as it happens by phlebotomy; nor is it necessary for ventozation to be done with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion until the entire body has been evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	 But if necessity provokes ventozation for illness or for prevention, administer it at the beginning of the month, in the middle, and at the end, and at any time it may be necessary.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	 Which causes are those in men where the blood is increased to the point that they need its extraction by ventozation and find heaviness and sadness on their head; and of these are those who find repletion and heat in their face and on their head, and on their neck; and of these are those who find paleness in their face and on their forehead and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and of these who throw out the place of their ventozation; and of these are those whose laughter is increased; and of these are those who find a taste of blood in their mouth, or that their tongue is coated and spits blood; and of these are those whose sleep is increased, and of these who sometimes see blood in their sleep with anguish and plagues and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	 And therefore, when [one] sees any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command that cupping be done, as [the cause] has passed for two or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	 Furthermore, cupping on the back of the neck is such that when you apply it to the head and it sinks into the hollows; however, it is preferable for this to be an evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	 And this cupping is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic [vein].
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	 And it is not advisable to use [cupping] on someone who has a complete cold or who has a cough, because it can cause great harm to them.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	 And therefore, [cupping] is not suitable for the elderly and those whose heads are affected by cold.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	 But for those who are undergoing [cupping] continuously on them, forgetfulness is induced; and therefore, it is advisable that you command the cupping practitioner to remove their hand slightly with the cup at intervals, fearing the development of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	 But cupping on the back is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilic [vein]: and therefore you apply it for asthma, and for constriction of the airways, and for tearing of the respiratory instrument, and for coughing, and for congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	 And it is necessary that the bladder be emptied a little, because if it is left full, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	 And the bladder of alhagdahan is useful for relieving headaches and for eye diseases, migraines, fever, and toothaches; and it is used instead of bloodletting from the vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	 And it is necessary that you order the cupping practitioner not to press with his hand for scarification, so that he does not cut an artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	 And cupping on the chin is useful for hoarseness in the mouth, and for corruption of the gums, and for similar ailments that are in the mouth, and it is used instead of bloodletting from the vein that is between the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	 But cupping that is done on both temples is effective for headaches, which are caused by an excess of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	 And cupping on both sides within the eyes is equivalent to bloodletting from three veins: the basilica, jugular and cephalic, because it draws blood from all the smaller veins that are in the flesh, and the smaller veins of the other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	 And command the ventouseur not to proceed too much in scarification, because the area is devoid of flesh, and only the nerves and arteries remain there.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	 And it is a cupping glass with which one is cupped over the haemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcerous wounds below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	 And it is necessary to command the cupping glass operator that he use a large glass and that it be of red-hot iron, because the place requires strong suction; and the small and subtle cupping glasses are drawn out and it should be scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	 But cupping glasses on the thighs should be applied with greater care, because they draw blood from all over the body, and this helps with old pains in the loins and lower back, bladder, provokes menstruation, helps with melancholy and anxiety; it is also a substitute for venesection of two veins, of the jugular and of two large veins.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	 However, they greatly weaken the whole body and cause syncope in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	 And the benefit of cupping glasses is similar to the benefit of cupping glasses on two thighs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	 And the quality of the positioning of the cupping glasses is that you should place the glass initially empty and suck with moderately warm suction, and do not prolong the position of the glasses, but rather keep them lightly, and leave them constantly, so that the humors come to the place by gradual progression.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	 And do not stop doing this and continue until you see the area turn red and swell, and the redness of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	 And then you make an incision and suck out a little bit at a time, and then consider the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	 For that person who has soft and delicate flesh with few pores, it is necessary to make an incision only once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	 And command the person performing the cupping to widen the incision slightly and prune a little bit, and always suck with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	 And if the blood is thick, then you should make two incisions, because with the first incision the pathway to the subtlety of the blood and its wateriness is opened up.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	 But in the second one, to the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	 And if the blood is very foul, then a third incision should be made so that it may obtain what is left behind.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	 And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or in small amounts, one incision is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	 And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we incise with many incisions; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to incise with preceding incisions.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	 And in the process of scarification, which involves reaching the depth of the vein alone.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	 And if that person's vein is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for the cupping glasses be anointed with gentle, opening, and resolving oils; in summer, this can be aloe oil or violet oil, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of cumin seeds; and in winter, it should be narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or hempseed oil, or those similar to them.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	 And if the excess is thick and harsh, then let the oil be of amaranth, or balm, or aloe, or aniseed, and similar to them.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	 But if the person to be cupped has large pores and soft skin, it is necessary that they be prohibited from oil, and it is necessary that for them the areas to be cupped be washed before cupping with vinegar water or strong vinegar water, or water of cumin seeds, or water of borage, and similar to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	 And for a person whose blood is of high moisture content, wash the cupping areas with vinegar or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	 And for that person whose secretions are abundant, wash their orifices with old wine, or with St. John's wort water, which is marjoram, or with a decoction of anise, or chamomile, and similar herbs.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	 And it is necessary that the enema be administered before the bath; it is also necessary that it be given immediately after the bath for one or two hours, and it is necessary to sleep near the enema.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	 What is necessary is that the patient be bled before receiving an enema.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	 It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the person who is giving the enema or the one who needs to be bled has hot and inflamed blood because they are choleric and windy, then it is necessary that they take cooling foods, such as sorrel, vinegar, endive, watercress, lettuce, and syrup, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	 And let their food be like this: polenta, and lean bird meat, and foods prepared with vinegar, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	 And for that person whose complexion is cold, it is necessary that they drink sweet syrup or syrup of sumac seeds and sumac, and fragrant wine between old and new; and it is necessary to recommend to them that they use little drink and food, and let their foods be polenta, cabbage, peas, small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	 And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and phlebotomy, the drink should be greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	 And it is necessary that some men be given in drink at certain hours before bloodletting or phlebotomy, either theriac alpharac or a musk-based medicine, such as musk or nutmeg, so that the main members are comforted and the blood subtilized; and they should not take any other food.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	 But the bloodlettings that do not involve scarification should be placed on the liver, and on the spleen and gout areas, and on the navel, in the joint areas, and the pudendum of the woman, because these members do not tolerate scarification upon them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	 And this is not required for anything other than attracting blood from the members, such as placing a bloodletting cup on the breast in an illness of nosebleed; and it is used so that the cold, thick blood of the member may be dissolved, such as when placed on the abdomen and navel; because this rarefies the member and nourishes it and removes pain by resolving flatulence.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	 And it is placed on the hemorrhoids when they occur in their swelling or itching, because by virtue of strong attraction, it lifts up the swelling and removes the itch from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	 "And in a similar way, when there is swelling on the liver and spleen due to wind trapped within them.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	 "These swellings are treated only with suction, and some times they are treated with fire (or heat).
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	 "And sometimes these treatments are applied full of tepid water to the sicknesses of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	 "And this is because when the swelling is full and large, it should be treated with hot water alone or water in which there are suitable herbs.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	 "Form of swelling treated with heat: the opening should be two fingers wide, as we have made it; the amount of pus should be half a palm's length; and in the side of it, in the circular part, half of it, the hole should be small according to the amount that can enter into it the tip of a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	 "It should be made of copper or citron, with thick edges, smooth and polished so that it does not disturb the member due to its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	 "And in the middle of it, there should be a crossbar of copper or iron where a candle is placed with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	 "And this swelling should be much larger than the one we have mentioned; and the smaller ones, according to the sicknesses and the condition of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	 And the bloodletting cups of infants and emaciated individuals are different from those of young adults and robust bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	 And the method of placing this bloodletting cup with fire on the limb is to extend a cloth with decent wood fire in front of a few candles made of wax, and place it in the middle of the crossbar in the middle area of the bloodletting cup, so that the fire is lit around the base and does not burn the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	 Then it is placed on the patient's limb, and the finger is placed on the hole as mentioned earlier. When we have the bloodletting cups and do not need to remove the finger, the steam will rise from that hole, and then the cup will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	 Then heat the cloth according to its method, and replace it if needed.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	 However, in the case of a bloodletting cup administered for pleurisy, it is filled with water and does not have a crossbar or hole. It is only placed on the limb when it is full of water.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	 And this is its shape: The larger this bloodletting cup, the better, as it can hold more water.
Capitol .xcvii.	 Chapter XCVII.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	 Leeches are not administered to all members but only to those in which it is impossible to position cupping glasses due to their small size, such as the foot and gums, or similar parts; or to members that lack flesh, such as the finger and nose, and similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	 And the quality of using those leeches which have been found in clean stagnant waters.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	 And then they should be placed day and night in stagnant water until they are sluggish, making sure there is no residue in their stomachs. Then evacuate the body at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping. And then rub the patient's member until it turns red; and then place them on him.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	 And when they are full and fall off.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	 And if it is possible to suction the area with a cupping glass, it is more helpful.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	 And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and warm water; and rub and squeeze it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	 And if the flow of blood is prolonged after the removal of the leeches and it continues to ooze, then insert a cloth soaked in cold water, and place it over the area until the oozing stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	 Based on the context and similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	 And it is necessary, if required, to repeat bloodletting, changing them as often as possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	 And if bloodletting is prohibited, then the area should be pricked with fresh blood or insert a needle in the area until blood comes out; and it should be done quickly, because those places that feel any blood will soon heal.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	 And when you want them to dry, sprinkle a little powdered alum or salt or ashes over them, and they will dry quickly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	 This is the beginning of the treatise on restoration, the third part.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	 This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations that occur in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	 Oh, son, know that this chapter is boasted about by foolish doctors and common people who at any time do not respect the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	 And for this reason it has happened that this method of the scholars in our land is neglected; and I have not forgotten it at any time throughout everything; and I have not added anything to what follows, except by the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study upon their understanding, until I extracted the knowledge from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	 And then I directed my attention towards experiments and studies throughout the course of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	 And I have already described all that is contained in my knowledge and on which my experiment has passed in this chapter; since I have shortened it for you others and delivered you from the occupation of length; and I have shortened it to the end of abbreviation; and shown it to the end of explanation; and formed in it many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as it is done by addition of explanation, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	 Chapter one.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	 Summary and compilation concerning the fracture of bones, from which a necessary preamble is required before we begin to recall the broken limbs and their various types.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	 Therefore, we should say in the preamble of this chapter the summations of the discourse; and the chapters to which at the beginning are necessary the artists and fixed on the truth of those; so it is with you and those who are apt that know or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	 And therefore I say that when any fracture, dislocation, torsion or fall occurs, it is necessary for you to begin with phlebotomy or purging, or both at the same time, unless there is some prohibiting cause, such as weakness of power, or if the affected person is a child, or an old man in decline, or if it is a time of very hot weather, or very cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	 And soon he should be satisfied with food consisting of fresh herbs, and of bird meat and crabs; and we prohibit heavy meats and filling oneself with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are certain that the abscess has been cauterized, and if you do not fear an outpouring of matter in the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	 And then return the patient to their previous diet with which they are accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	 And so when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the patient should be fed with nutritious foods of rich and thick nourishment, such as foods made from boiled wheat with water, rice, cabbage, onions, cow stomachs, eggs, fresh cheese, fatty meats similar to these, and with this diet a lighter and better coagulation of the fracture is achieved.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	 And know that broken bones in people who are very old or feeble cannot be continued and healed according to their nature due to the dryness of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	 And they are always healed and continued according to their nature due to the dryness of those members, and those that are continuous and healed are in them at the end of tenderness, such as the bones of small infants.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the patient's food intake, especially foods that are heavy, viscous, and dense, as we have mentioned.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	 Different types of fractures according to different parts of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	 And know that the types of fractures vary according to the different parts of the body, because a fracture in the thigh bone is different from a fracture in the skull; and a fracture in the foot bone is different from a fracture in the hand; and similarly, all other parts of the body differ from one another.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	 And I will recall every kind of fracture, explained in its own chapter separate from others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	 Also, the types of fractures vary within themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	 And the types of bone fractures are also differentiated within themselves; for there is a curved fracture when stars occur in it; and sometimes a fracture occurs according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the patella, shinbone, and metatarsals, both with and without protrusion, as happens on the skin when preparing to write. It is also a fracture with an open wound and disruption in the skull, and it is a small fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	 And in all kinds of things, it is necessary or painful to remember the restoration of him, according to what will come as a distinct memory in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	 Signal of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	 And by this it is known to be a bone fracture: there is a twisting of it, and an elevation or prominence felt upon touching it, and also when you press it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	 Therefore, when there is neither apparent twisting in the place nor a distinct sensation upon your touch, and when you move the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	 It is possible that it may be a slight twist or a small crack, so you should not move it with your hand and compress it completely; rather, place upon it of the medicines that come to mind at that moment which are appropriate for the place; and then bind tightly with fine bandages.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	 And know that when the place is bent and not cut into two or something else does not happen in it suddenly, as it is raised entirely from its position, then you must begin immediately to straighten it, having put on it something that causes heat cautiously.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	 "And if an abscess occurs on the patient, leave it alone for some days until the abscess stops; then treat it with as much lightness and skill as you can.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	 "And know that the restorative treatment and cauterization of [the patient] is lighter than for the bone in which the abscess occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	 "And then strengthen [the patient] according to how their recovery will proceed.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	 "But if the abscess is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb in two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; either with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or with one rope and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	 "And let your position be such that you place the limb in its natural shape, while the broken parts of the limb are extended; then make sure to return these additions with skill and in any way possible.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	 "And be careful, according to your strength, that no pain or injury occurs to the patient due to your operation; and make sure, according to your ability, that you apply one bone to its companion in the best manner.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	 "And it is fitting that at that time you should touch the bone with your hand, and if you see any different cause here, correct it and treat it according to the extent of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	 Based on the given text and the pattern of translation provided, here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	 And then connect, balance and perform a decent operation and constriction on that member, ensuring rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make them avoid movement during their wakefulness and sleep, observe their restlessness and agitation, control their bowel movements, and monitor all of their movements with all of their strength; and wait to see if the position of the limb is one that ensures no pain, because when the position of the limb causes pain or injury; then it is necessary to change it to another position in which there is no pain; and ensure that this position is straight and balanced, so that the limb does not become twisted when restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	 And the quality of the constriction on the calm member is what I recommend; know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and largeness and in their forms.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	 And for those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and the toe and their likes, in such cases it is necessary for the covering to be of fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	 But those that are large, such as the thigh or the leg, in these cases it is necessary for the covering to be thick and hard, because a thick cover binds the large member strongly on all sides with equal constriction, so that in it no bruise can enter.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	 And then begin, immediately after your evacuation of excrement, to apply plasters appropriately for this purpose, over the location of the fracture with three or four bandages depending on the size of the limb; and strengthen your hand a little with the plaster.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	 And then come to it from the highest point of the location of the fracture, and tighten more so that your stricture does not become loose with which you have strengthened the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	 And then extend yourself with a bandage over the location of the fracture a little, and gradually loosen the stricture until you have taken from the location a large portion.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	 And then take another bandage and wrap it over the broken place with a bandage, and then come to the bandages from the lowest part of the fracture; and let your operation be in the strictness of the bandage and in its loosening according to what we have said above in the first bandage.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	 And then place between the bandages of linen or cloth with which is covered the crookedness of the fracture, if there is crookedness in it; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	 And then place another bandage over it, and then cover these bandages with well-made steel bandages immediately, if there is no swelling or abscess in the place, and then place on it that which dries up the abscess and removes the swelling; and leave it for some days; and then strengthen over it with the steel bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	 And let the steps of the patient's bed be made of hollow canes, or well-formed reeds; or they may be of pine wood; or of palm ribs. And let each step be wide according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	 However, it is necessary that the step placed on the fracture be a bit thicker and wider than the other steps. The length of the step should correspond to the size of the limb in terms of both largeness and smallness. Then strengthen the steps with another bandage according to your first binding. And then bind it decently on top, as we have said about binding, and let the binding be tighter nearer to the fracture, and the further it is from the fracture, the less tight the binding should be.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	 It is necessary that the threads be average in thickness and fineness, and they should be of linen. And if the threads are thick, as I have seen through the operation of some foolish people placing their threads of twisted hemp cord, it is a great mistake, because when the binding would need to be equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	 And likewise, thin threads are not suitable, because you will not be able to achieve with them what you want by binding, and it is not necessary that there be more than a finger's width between step and step.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	 And if the patient is affected by the extremities of the stars near the constriction in those places, then place beneath them a piece of wool or fleece until it causes no harm.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	 Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by a bruise, and there is a disruption in the spine, and I will remember this in the following chapter according to its specific nature.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	 And know that no completely broken limb is tight with stars on the first day; the reason for this is because the limb, when it is large, should not be pressed upon with stars except after about five days or seven, or more, according to your caution of an impending abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	 And this is the manner of plasters with which the ancients restored, which are placed upon fractures and dislocations and sprains.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	 Manner of plaster for the restoration of fractures, suitable for many conditions and especially for women and children, because it does not cause heat or cold: and it is that you take the powder from the mill, and it is the marrow of the flour that falls in the sides of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	 And make it thus as it is, except that you sieve it with egg white, and place the composition of it not too thick nor too thin; and then use this.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	 This sentence describes another method for creating an emollient that can treat fractures, dislocations, and sprains. Here's the translation:
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	 This sentence describes another method for creating a plaster to treat fractures and dislocations:
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	 All should be crushed in a mortar with much caution, and they should be sifted, and they should be mixed with water or egg white and then administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	 Method for plastering joints and dislocated bones that cause pain in those areas, as well as cracks and fractures: take clean wool and soak it in vinegar and melted fat, then place it on the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	 However, this plaster has no restorative power, but rather restrains pus and alleviates pain specifically.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	 Another method for a plaster that heals broken bones: take leaves of wild fig and wild poppy; grind them all together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	 Method for a brief plaster applied for the healing of bone fractures and to promote the resolution of remaining pus: take equal parts of mallow root, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, and oats; grind them all together and mix with vinegar, if the member is not open.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	 But if it is open, then mix it with wet coriander water or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	 This text appears to be discussing a different method for creating a poultice with a stronger resolution than the previous one, specifically when dealing with a hard abscess that requires the restoration of a limb. Here is a line-by-line translation:
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	 In Spain, it has been seen that they place [something] on the broken member before its restoration and the causes in which there is a small amount of heat, such as myrrh, wax and similar substances to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	 A way to make a plaster for wounds and pain: take equal parts of cumin, hazelnut shells or feathers from a bird, althea, and salt; crush them together, sieve them, and mix well to make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	 However, the duration for which the plaster should remain in place depends on whether there is pain or swelling or if the bone is broken and out of place; in such cases, you should not remove it for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	 And if there is severe pain or swelling or inflammation at the site, then you should cut it open or remove it immediately, and take off the plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	 And take a linen cloth and marine sponge soaked in warm water, and with it wash the area until the swelling stops and the pain is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place on it wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rosemary oil, and bind it overnight until you are sure that the abscess has formed, and that the inflammation of the limb has subsided, and that the pain has been alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then carefully apply that fine and small plaster, do not tighten it with your first constriction, but use the same one that was used for healing.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	 And if you see that the abscess and the redness and the pain and all the inflammations have already been removed from everything, and you need bandages and constrictions, then apply them in the same way as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	 And if nothing happens to the limb from any of those causes that we have mentioned, then do not remove it before three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes everything is left for twenty days according to what you see in the release of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches the coagulation of the flesh on that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	 Then tighten the constriction more than your first constriction, and adjust it according to the patient's growing condition, as their health progresses.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	 But if you see that the fracture site has dried and become thinner than necessary, know that nutrition is not reaching it. Therefore, moisten it with lukewarm water each time you release it; and this should be done for three days; slightly loosen the constriction, and through this procedure, nourishment will flow to the limb, and it will heal slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	 Sure, here's the translation of the sentence:
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	 Here is a translation of the given sentence into English:
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	 "Chapter two: On fractures that occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	 "There are many types of fractures, and their shapes are varied, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by a blow from a stick, and the blow passes through all the bone, which is left behind as it exits, just like this happens in wood. And because of this, this type is called splintering; or the stick cuts off some part of the bone, and cuts the flesh but does not pass through to the other side; and this type of fracture is called absolute lifting.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	 "And the wound from these two types of fractures is either large or small, and it is a crushing or splintering injury; and the cause is a blow with powder or falling onto stone, and they resemble each other.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	 "And this type of fracture can be penetrating, which affects the skin and tissue beneath the bone, or it can occur on the surface of the bone, and the wound from these two types of fractures can be either large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	 "And another type of fracture is one that occurs within the bone, in its finer structure, and because of this, this type of fracture is called 'capillary'.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	 Here's the translation of your source sentence:
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	 And this is particularly done in the bodies of young children, such as infants' heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	 And for all these types of broken bones, they are treated with weights like little stars scattered.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	 And I will come with a reminder about all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	 And recognize all these types of fractures by detection on them, and by inquiry with tests and removal of corrupt flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	 And the capillary type is recognized because it is exposed on the bone and it is scrubbed and anointed with oil, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	 But in the treatment of fractures, first consider the patient's accidents, and if you see through the accidents that it indicates clearly by manifestation of fear, such as vomiting of bile, distension, loss of consciousness, voice loss, fainting, acute fever, issuance of the humors and heat of those, and similarity to their accidents in the major dispositions, without doubt it will not be healed.  (Accidents here refers to symptoms or signs of illness)
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	 And if you see non-serious accidents, then hope for health, and thus begin his treatment.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	 The text appears to be describing a medical procedure involving the treatment of joint pain, particularly gout. Let's break down and translate the provided sentence into English:
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	 And if it is during the summer days, then it is necessary to cut open the bone in front of the seventh day, ensuring that what is under the bone does not become corrupt due to the skin, and so that the accidents we have mentioned occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	 And if the fracture has already reached the skin covering the brain, and it is with small parts and fragments, then it is necessary to cut open the comminuted and fragmented part, as I will advise you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	 And it is that you shave the head of the sick person, and cut open over the bone according to custom and method as possible for you according to the shape of the wound, and that it be light on the sick person.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	 And if it happens to you that there is detection of bone, flow of blood or hot pus, then you should apply to it what is necessary, and that is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil, and make the wound rest until the pus subsides, and you are sure about the flow of the blood; and then begin on the sawing of the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	 And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And the first method is that you cut the bone with a narrow scissors like this, and this is its shape: And then apply another scissor of this kind, slightly wider than the previous one; and this is its shape:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	 And then administer more of the second ointment than the first.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	 And it is appropriate to have a diverse number of ointments, some of which are thicker than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and should be at the end of their sharpness, and they should be made of Indian iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	 And use them easily with a hammer on the ointments, so that you do not hit the head and injure the patient.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	 And if the bone is strong and hard, then it is appropriate to drill a hole in its circumference before you administer the ointments with the trepan, which are called non-penetrating trepans.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	 And they are not called this way only because they do not reach the end of the bone to that point which is close to it; rather because the trepan has a round tip or edge on that part where its sharp end is, similar to a small margin or circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	 And it is convenient for you to take many of these trepans, each one suitable for the thickness of every bone, until there is in all the bones of the skull an end that is sharp, and the quantity in length and width should be according to the quantity of the thickness of this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	 Here's my best attempt at translating the given sentence:
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	 And it is important that you watch with all caution that the incision does not touch any cause of infection.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	 And then when you have circled the bone and perforated it, and if the abscess is attached to it, you must extract it. It is important that you scrape and clean the rough part of the bone with another instrument similar to a knife, but more delicate and sharper than other knives.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	 And if there remain any small or splintered parts of the bone, then take those out with ease using the tools that you have; and then cure the wound with linens and ointments as we have said before.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And another method of operation is light and far from fear, which Guallia teaches and praises greatly; and his words are as follows: it is necessary for you at the beginning to begin uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most intense and obvious. When you have uncovered that part and placed under it the tip of this sharp and joyful knife, whose form is as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	 And the lenticular part is sharp and does not cut anything, and the pointed part is from it two finger widths long, as you see; so that the lenticular part fits to the abscess with its sharp edge facing into the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	 And then strike the protruding part of a fracture with a small hammer until the bone is completely splintered, and be sure that the skin does not suffer any accident that you fear in any way. And if the physician were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of his craft; certainly, even if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	 Then if there is any cause that breaks the skin near the bone in some places of the bone, remove it from him with the pointed end of a lancet, and extract it from him with ease, for it is removed from him without injury and without fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	 And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the skin, and that which is broken or separated from the bone remains on its surface with roughness and subtle thorns, then it is necessary to shave away that roughness and eliminate those thorns with sharp razors, prepared in diverse quantities so that you can use them appropriately and correctly according to what you perceive in your operation of that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	 It is necessary that you use the largest razor to shave the bone at first, and then use increasingly finer ones until you reach the finest and sharpest of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	 In any of the other small or subtle fractures, it is necessary to administer care according to what you have lost in its correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	 And it is because not everything is agreed upon among all those who have studied this art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	 And we shall discuss what we have written about large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	 And if the fat is torn when you remove the bone, then take a cloth according to the size of the wound and dip it in warmed oil, and place it on the opening of the wound; and then take another cloth, folded or tripled, and dip it in wine and warmed oil and place it on the first cloth, and apply as little pressure as possible so that you do not crush the flesh; and then administer linen bandages, but not too tightly, only to the extent of the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	 And leave it with this care for a day or two until you are sure that the abscess has passed; and then remove it and administer medicines which have a drying effect, such as linseed oil and powdered iris root, and pepper and Aristolochia, and similar things.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	 Based on the provided text and the pattern of translation, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	 And be mindful according to your skill that the wound in your care is clean; and do not allow it to be covered with an ointment or anything else; nor let you increase virulence in it; for when it is confined under the brain's membrane, it corrupts it and will rot it, and thus upon the patient comes this malignant evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	 And it happens in the vault of the head, especially when the bone is hollowed out and the care is neglected, and there is darkness on its surface; therefore, if these accidents happen to the patient as we have said, know that it is pernicious without any doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 And if darkness occurs not from the disease but from the medicine applied on it, and it is due to the power of that medicine causing that darkness, then you should take one part honey and three parts rose oil, and with these anoint a cloth, and then place it on the vault; and then treat it with the appropriate healing spices until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	 Chapter III
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	 On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	 Know that the nose is not broken except for two superior parts together or one of them alone, because in it there are two bones; the lower part is cartilaginous and does not break, and nothing happens to it except bruising and crookedness and narrowing.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	 And let this be done by you for ease, and ensure that nothing falls on the patient due to your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	 And if the break is in the uppermost part of the nose, and the finger cannot reach it, then it should be equalized with the end of a reed, on which there is a small thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	 And if the break is in two parts, then you do likewise.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	 And try to restore the patient on the first day of the break, if possible; and if not, then you must wait seven or ten days before cauterizing the abscess.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	 And then insert a wick of linen cloth into the tip of the nose, if the break is in one part; or put two swabs, if the break is in two parts, and it should be thick enough to fill the hole in the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	 However, some of the old restorers say that the swabs should be wrapped in wool and changed every day, but I have not seen this; it is better that the wick be soaked in an egg-white plaster mixed with powdered chalk; and then leave the swab until the bone has healed and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	 And sometimes it may be necessary to intervene in the nose, in the event of a broken nose, wrapping it in lion cloth, and if the patient has suffered a severe fracture and is not forbidden from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	 And this cause is not necessary to you; do it if you wish, or leave it alone if you wish.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	 And if there is another case of an abscess on the nose, apply a plaster to the nose with wax or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diaquilon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	 But if there is no abscess on the nose, then it is necessary to apply a plaster to that area from outside with sesame flour and finely ground beans mixed with egg white; and then place a lion cloth over it, and do not touch the nose with any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	 But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed, it is necessary to cut into those [fractures], and remove them with appropriate instruments; then close the incision, and treat it with something that heals and solidifies, and with plasters suitable for this purpose.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	 And if there is a wound inside the nose, it is necessary to treat that with cautery and insert lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	 Chapter IV
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	 Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	 When the jaw is broken and there is no open wound, observe whether the break is only on the outside and not split into two parts inside, then its treatment is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	 Therefore, if the break is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth, and similarly if the break is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and with that push the swelling of the fracture inside towards the outside parts with ease, with your other hand from the outside of the bone; thus you straighten it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	 And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer a traction of both parts according to their proper alignment until the union is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	 And if there is a dislocation of the teeth, then strengthen those which you expect to remain in place with a thread of gold or silver or linen; and then place wax on the broken jaw, and then place a doubled cloth on it, and place a large star-shaped dressing decently made, or a sole of felt equal to the length of the jaw; and then tie it above according to how you are familiar with tying it and as is suitable for the application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	 And command the patient to rest and be calm, and withhold their food from them sparingly.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	 And if you believe that the appearance has already been changed in some way, then you take it off on the third day; and then rectify what has been altered from him and plaster it with powder of mallow, or with egg white, or with sesame flour, after you have removed the bandage from him, and place a piece of wool over the plaster.  />
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	 Then when this plaster is attached and adjusted to him, and the arrangement of the bone is not altered, leave it there without removing it until he is healed and strengthens the fracture; for many times this fracture is healed in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	 And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said many times for his treatment until he is healed and the abscess is removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	 And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or splinters; then you should carefully remove those splinters using an instrument suitable for removing such instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with a fleam (a type of surgical instrument) according to the amount of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	 And when you have removed those stitches and nothing is taken out, then if the opening of the wound is wide, you should close it; but if not, place on it one of the suitable plasters that are appropriate for this purpose and let it heal.
Capitol .v.	 Chapter 5
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	 On the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	 Many times the clavicle is broken from the front part due to a muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	 For it is broken, or separated, or divided into two parts without stitches; and it is easy to restore it; or it happens that stitches occur in it, and it is difficult to restore it; or it happens that the fracture is with a wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	 And the operation in that case, when the fracture is without a wound, is to have two assistants present, so that one holds the broken clavicle and follows it, and the other extends the neck towards that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	 And then bandage the fracture with your own clothes until its form is set as needed, ensuring there is neither a protuberance nor a concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	 And if you need more extension, then place a roll of cloth or wool under the patient's head, and let its size be according to your need; and extend and raise the collarbone and compress the roll with your hand until you bandage the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	 And if you cannot pull the end of the collarbone to the sides, because it has reached the breast, then have the patient lie on their back with a pillow placed under the shoulder muscles.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	 And the assistant should press on the patient's shoulder muscles towards the sides until the collarbone bone is raised and is in the correct position on top of the chest, and then you should straighten the fracture and bandage it with your clothes.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	 But if you feel the ends of the collarbone and they are sharp, then it is necessary to cut into it and extract those sharp ends with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if it is retained in the bone, then you should contrive an incision with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, having placed under the collarbone the instrument that serves to extract; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and its form is as follows:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	 It seems like the text is describing a procedure involving a cup or vessel of some sort. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	 Sure, here is the translation of your provided text:
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	 And if the wound that you have cut when extracting the thorn from the bone is wide and you are certain of an abscess forming, then you should close the two lips of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	 And if the wound is small or you fear an abscess forming, then fill the wound with cloth and powder according to the size of the wound's cut.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	 And if an abscess forms, then infuse a cloth in vinegar, rose oil, and wine, and place it on the area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	 However, when the bone is constricted without a wound or cut, place a plaster made of wheat flour and egg white on it, and then place a stopper over it, and then place the sponge under the patient's head, if you need to do so, and then take a bandage that the Saracens use, which is very long, and its width should be about one palm or thereabouts; and then place double-layered powder over the stopper and the plaster; and then take a thin board whose length is three fingers and similar in width; and then wrap that with cloth, and then wrap that cloth with the board on the fracture site; and then place bandages similarly as described, and roll it up over the patient's neck and under their head, and bring it around to all parts, and whenever the constricted fracture decreases in constriction, and this is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	 And be careful not to move the splint over the broken bone; therefore, it is necessary that you check on the patient every day, and when the bandage softens or the splint seems to have moved, then you should adjust this and strengthen the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	 And then place the patient's head on their neck, and place under their pillow a small cushion during the night, so that with this, the adjutor muscles of the same side are raised, and thus the fracture of the clavicle is elevated by the muscle; or the arm of the patient is tied to the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	 And do not untie the bandage unless there is swelling or pus in the area within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	 And then renew the poultice if you see the face turning blue, and adjust in the stricture and restore it, leaving it until the fracture of the clavicle is restored and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	 And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	 Chapter VI
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	 On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	 The text you provided is a blend of languages, seemingly drawing from medieval Latin and Romance languages like Spanish, Italian, or French. Let's break down the sentence line by line:
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	 And so when the place in him is broken — and it is broken in the middle of him — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture forcefully prepare him and reduce that shape according to the natural form in all manner of cleverness that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	 And then place on the wound powder of ground meal mixed with egg white and stop the bleeding; and then place a double layer of cloth powder; and then place on him a thin board as wide as the entire spatula or even a little wider.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	 But if the board is concave in any of the places on the spatula, then fill that concavity with something to stop the bleeding and then raise the board until it is level.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	 And then strengthen on top with a long bandage, tied tightly and securely, so that the board is not moved from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	 And check the bandage every day; and whenever it is found to be softened, bandage again and strengthen and equalize the board if it has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	 And tell the patient to lie on his back.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	 And the splint will be removed after 20 days or 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	 And so when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and know for certain that it belongs to those bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	 And if you proceed from the place of the bone and put a cord underneath it, then you cut above it, remove it, and act according to what we have said about the fracture of the furcula of Sadacio in case of an abscess here.
Capitol .vii.	 Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	 About the restoration of a foot fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	 The foot sometimes breaks in the middle part and that takes a long time to heal, but the ends of it move quickly since they are cut and crushed.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	 And of its accidents, when the middle is broken, it inclines towards the inner parts and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, fever and vomiting blood; and the cavity in the broken bone is evident and not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	 And its restoration is such that the patient is laid on their back and a cushion is placed between their shoulder blades; then press on their muscles and adjust their ribs with both hands, and be subtle in the operation of it and in the positioning according to every possible and suitable manner until the shape of the bone returns as required.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given text line by line:
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	 Sure, let's break down the text line by line:
Capitol .viii.	 This appears to be the title of a chapter in the medieval medical treatise. It translates to "Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	 Regarding the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	 Know that a fracture of the ribs only occurs in large areas near the back; and in their end parts from the front, this does not occur unless it is due to the fact that they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	 And understanding of it is not hidden from feeling, therefore you should know about it with these words.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	 And the restoration should be done in such a way that you reduce the fracture with words according to the possible method, until it is reduced as necessary, and then apply and strengthen the broken bones with a bandage, if needed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	 And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the inner parts, then severe pain and puncture occur in the patient, similar to the puncture that occurs in those who have pleurisy, and this happens because the bones pierce the membrane; and it causes difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	 And already the ancients were clever about that with very clever words.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	 And of them is what they said: it is necessary to place food before the patient that causes inflation and flatulence, so that the stomach is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the outer parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	 Sure, here is the translation of the given sentence:
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	 And some of them say that it should be placed on the bladder and that one should suck with strength; this seems reasonable, but there is a fear that the bladder might draw the excess to the area due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	 And some of them say: the area should be covered with wool that has been soaked in hot oil, and cushions should be placed between the ribs until it is full, making sure the wrapping is tight around the body; then the patient should be treated with a poultice of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	 And if the patient experiences severe pain that they cannot tolerate, and the bones press against the membrane with a pointed object, it is feared for the patient's life; therefore, cut into the area, reveal the fractured rib, then place an instrument on top of it that preserves the airway—the tool mentioned earlier—and gently separate the bones and remove it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	 And then we should join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with dressings until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	 And if an abscess forms inside, then cut open and press poultices soaked in hot oil onto the area, and treat the patient with water that is suitable for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	 "And let him be laid on his back on the bed he sleeps in until he is cured.
Capitol .ix.	 "Chapter IX
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	 "On the restoration of a broken spine in the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	 "Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, followed by their reduction, and likewise with the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	 "And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be cured or not, then consider: if you see their hands are softened, numbed, dead, and he cannot move those nor extend nor strengthen those, and when you press those with your fingers or prick them with a needle and he does not feel pain in those, then you should know that he will not be cured, and in such a state it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	 "And if he moves those and feels constriction with your fingers or pricking, then you should know that the bone of the neck is saved and that the patient will be cured with care.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	 "And if you see the vertebrae of the neck like this and you want to know if he will be cured or not, then consider his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	 "Then if you see that they are also softened, it happens to those what happened to the hands, and soon when lying on his back, he has venting and discharge without his will, and sometimes he is laid on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you should know that it is fatal, and therefore do not trouble with his care.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	 But if none of those causes are present, the cause is better and easier.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	 And the treatment for this is that you pierce towards the pus of the abscess cautiously and place over the dry spine oil, alone or with drops of honey; place it on that area some times a day until the abscess is drained.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	 And then place one of the comforting and strengthening plasters, and bind it firmly with a bandage; and command the patient to rest and be calm, and not to sleep on the painful side until healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	 And if there is attrition of the bone or any other cause that has been separated from it, then you should cauterize on the tendon and cut that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture if it is large; and then cure it with some ointment until healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	 But if the back of the bone is broken and it is the end of the spine, then you should insert the middle finger of your left hand into the rectum, and straighten the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible according to its size; and then place a plaster and splint on it, if necessary, and then strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	 And if you feel broken bones in him, then place a splint on it, remove it, and treat the wound with the treatment that is prescribed until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	 Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	 On the healing of the anus.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	 The bones of the ankles are often broken, and if they are broken, then the fracture is only in the extremities of these [bones] and they are extended in length and decline towards the inside; and it happens that the patient feels pain in the area and punctuation, and the leg becomes numb when it is broken.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	 And the restoration of it [the ankle] is that you place your hand over it until it is in the shape of the fracture.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	 And if the fracture is only in the extremity of it [the bone], then you should enclose it according to what seems appropriate to you by equality, enclosing it until it resembles its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	 But if the fracture is in the length or has already declined towards the inside, then you should have the patient lie on their back until you are prepared to restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	 And then when you have enclosed it [the fracture], place a plaster on top of it, and also place a wooden or leather splint on it, and secure it tightly so that you do not fear a puncture of the fracture or displacement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	 The text you provided appears to be in a language influenced by Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, which suggests it could be in Old Occitan or another medieval Romance language. Let's break down the sentence and attempt a translation:
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	 "But if you encounter an abscess (apostema), then you must stop the stretching and restoration until the abscess subsides. Place something over it that promotes healing, as previously mentioned; then return to restoring him, and strengthen him accordingly.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	 "And if such a condition occurs in the ribs or they are broken, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter XI
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	 Of the restoration of the fractured elbow.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	 "The elbow is that which is between the humerus and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	 "And if it is broken, then its restoration can be done in one of two ways. The first way is for you to take a flat piece of wood, medium in size, like this:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	 "And let there be two laces attached at both ends, and then it should be suspended from a high place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	 "And let the patient sit on a stool; and then he should throw out his broken arm over the wooden piece until it reaches the middle of the curve of the wood.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	 "And then it should be suspended with some heavy weight, or the servant should extend it to both sides; and then the doctor should hold the fracture with his hands together until the fracture returns as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	 The sentence you've provided is written in Occitan, a Romance language from the medieval period. Here's the translation of each line into English:
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	 And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen on the fracture with one band and on that with another band, and each of the two assistants should extend to both its parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	 And therefore, if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then half of the band should be placed above the patella and the other half below the fracture towards the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	 Similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow, then it is appropriate to place the band over that location and over that elbow.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	 Seal it with ease and without labor, and as soon as it is sealed according to what is appropriate and applied by good application, then strengthen that if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	 But if an abscess occurs, then leave the stricture for seven days, and place over it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess subsides, and then strengthen that.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	 And the manner of strengthening that is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a wrap of new linen cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that support, and place your open hand over the patient's muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	 "And place a cloth and strengthen over the helper's arms so that the arm is in a stable position, unless you are advised against this due to a broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	 "Then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	 "And it is that you place over the fracture a splint which is wider and stronger than other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on each side.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	 "Then strengthen over the splints with the bandage that has been mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	 "And it is that your bandage on the site of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	 "And when the fracture is longer, the bandage should be less tight.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	 "And so if you see the arrangement of the splints and the bandage as we have said in the hour when you restore the limb to its place, then do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	 "And if you fear pus formation, then leave the bandage and the splints in place for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	 "And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that swelling or inflammation does not occur on the site; or it is prohibited that food reaches the limb due to excessive tightness of the bandage; and thus correct everything according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	 If you are confident that nothing will cause this condition, then do not remove the bandage until approximately three days or more have passed.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	 And let the patient's sleep be on their back, with their hands placed on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	 And place on the helper a cushion filled with wool equally, and always consider during the night or day that the shape of the broken limb is not displaced or dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, so correct this immediately with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	 And give the patient's food according to the order we mentioned earlier, so that the food is soft at the beginning until it starts to strengthen; then it is necessary to make the food thicker for them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	 For it is customary for the helper and the leg to be strengthened in forty days; then it is necessary for them to be released and a bath should be administered, and the area should be treated with ointments that correct this.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	 And if the fracture is close to the joint, then do not remove the ligament and splints from it for one day or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter XII
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	 On the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	 And if only the large or small vein is broken and both are pierced together quickly.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	 When the small vein is cut above, its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	 And when it is broken below the breakage of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	 And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	 Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small vein above, it is suitable for the doctor to make a small extension with ease before it becomes swollen.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	 But if the large vein is what is pierced, then it is necessary to make a more vigorous extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	 And if both veins are pierced together, then you must make the extraction much stronger.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	 It is necessary that you place the hand for its restoration and that the extension of it be spread over a cushion, and let the pulse of the hand be above the parts, more than all the others, and let the auricular one be lower than the others, and let the patient sit on a low chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	 And there should be a cushion in front of him at his height or rightness, so that the patient does not struggle.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	 And another minister extends his arm from the side, placing it below or with a bandage, and another minister does the same above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	 And then the doctor envelops the bone until it is reduced to its best shape possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	 And if there are splinters in the bone, then you must remove all of them from their place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	 And if there appears in him a splinter that touches the cord and you do not hope for his recovery, then make an incision over it and remove it according to the method we mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	 But if the fracture is with a wound, I have already made a separate chapter for that, so take care of it accordingly.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	 And if an abscess appears at the beginning of your reduction, then you should line a cloth with oiled and white wax cerate, which is mild between sharpness and subtleness, and strongly wrap it around that with fine stricture until the abscess has subsided; then remove the cerote and place a prepared plaster made of ground wheat flour and egg white on it; and afterwards place lead plates over it. And let the plate which is placed over that fracture be wider and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	 And know that the name of the stars in the arm is found in the major dispositions, whether it's a fracture in one finger or in two fingers together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	 Then place your bandage over the site of the fracture more strongly and vigorously, and when you see the swelling spreading to the parts above the fracture or to the lower parts, apply the bandage a little moister according to what is remembered in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And the bandages that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and the thread used to secure it should be of medium thickness, between fine and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	 And observe the limb and the bandage over the next few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	 And if any cause occurs which requires correction, as soon as it happens to the limb, then you should immerse the limb in hot water until that swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	 And let the limb rest without constraint until it is at peace, and then return to bandaging.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	 And if the bandage has already softened and the bone has been moved and appears to be in place, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	 "And consider whether the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to an excess of constriction, for then it is necessary to soften it slightly and allow it to rest for some days until the nourishment reaches it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	 "But if the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to free him until about twenty days or around that time.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	 "And also the patient's hand should be suspended to prevent involuntary movements, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	 "And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or rather lightly in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the complexity of the condition and the natural disposition.
Capitol .xiii.	 "Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	 "On the restoration of a finger or toe fracture.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	 "Know that in the fingers and toes of the hands and feet, only slight bruising occurs when they are injured, and not fracture.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	 "And when the hand experiences a fracture or bruising, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back and in front of him place two hundred weights equally, and also place the hand over that which is extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	 And immediately the attendant should extend the broken bones, and the doctor should join them together until they are properly united with a good union.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	 And then it is necessary to place plaster and wool, lest an abscess occur; and immediately place a plate on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	 But if the fracture is in the interior parts, you should take the palm of the hand, and then make it resemble a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to squeeze it with their broken hand; immediately it should be tightly bound with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	 And there should be a heart of wax wrapped in cloth on which the hand is placed, so that the wax is applied to the palm; and squeeze it as necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	 But if the fracture is in the exterior parts, then it is necessary to place a plate on top and another plate beneath the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and immediately bind the bandage as the hand is wrapped around the rods with linen cloths.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	 And if there is a fracture in one of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the finger tip, it should be joined as necessary and immediately bound to the palm. If you wish, place a small straight plate on it so that the fracture is elevated and not worsened.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	 Certainly! Here’s the translation of the given sentence:
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	 And consider, in your treatment and approach, the disposition of the abscess cautiously and carefully—with your operation—in such a way that it is necessary when some cause of those occurs, according to how the story is told about it.
Capitol .xiv.	 Chapter XIV
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	 Of the restoration of the fracture of the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	 The thigh bone, when strongly hit, is broken and becomes evident by sensation as it moves to the front part and the uppermost part.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	 And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament under the fracture, and the patient should be placed on their stomach and face down.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	 And then the minister should extend all the ligaments to their full length according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	 But if the fracture is towards the head of the thigh, then let the ligament be close to the knee towards the patella, so that the extension reaches there, and the other ligament should be under the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	 Similarly, if the break is towards the knee, then the ligament should be made close to the knee, and the extension should be towards the lower parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	 And then the physician should join the bones with both hands until they are reduced to their natural shape and the bone is firmly united; at that time, it is necessary to place a plaster and bandage, lest an abscess occur in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	 But if an abscess occurs in the patient, then you should leave it alone for several days until the abscess has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	 The bandage should be made as follows: you must wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, and fold it two or three times, removing any excess; then wrap the leg until it reaches the ankle and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	 And insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the break on the lower side, so that the ends of the thread come out from the higher part of both sides; then turn around the leg and the thigh what remains of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	 And then place on the thigh in the location of that fracture splints, and place one of those splints on the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	 And then fill the spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the bandage may be held firm.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	 The text appears to be discussing a method for treating a bone fracture using bandages or bindings. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	 And then extend both ends of the thread through the openings until they reach the toe, and tighten both ends of the needles on the other side to ensure that the bandage does not slip from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	 And then leave the structure in place so that no corrosion, apostema, or swelling occurs on the limb; if any of these happen, then consider removing it from him, and correct what happens immediately, as we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	 But if the bone is broken where the lesion is located, then you must splint it as best as you can; if not, wrap it and keep it immobile, and treat it with the remedy mentioned previously until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	 And sometimes this bone fracture is strengthened by adjusting needles to it, as we have said in the adjutory and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	 But however, in the restoration of it done in this manner, no limping occurs to the patient; and if it is restored alone, or something else is applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he who was always lame limp.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	 "And know that the cushion should be held in place for forty days or a little more or less, and all of this depends on the diversity of conditions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	 "Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	 "On the restoration of the fracture of the knee joint.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	 "Know that a fracture of the knee joint occurs late, but it happens to some people more frequently.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	 "But if it happens to someone, then it is only a crack or hole in its parts, and this is with or without pain, and all of this depends on the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	 "And its restoration is such that the broken parts are made equal with the aforementioned methods, until it is joined and united as much as possible by equality, facility, and craftsmanship.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	 "Then place a plaster and press it onto that round part, if needed; and hold it tightly in place with a suitable bandage.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	 "Then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended for other fractures, such as poultices and similar things, to guard against any accident and what is suitable for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	 The translation for "Capitol .xvi." is "Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	 "On the restoration of a thigh fracture.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	 "Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is large and is named after the thigh itself; the other is thin and is called the fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	 "And it happens to each of the types of fractures that occur in both bones of the arm, and restoration is made in this way as with the arm equally, and its operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	 "And if two bones are broken together, the thigh becomes completely shattered.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	 "And if the thinner bone is broken, the thigh becomes shattered in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	 "And if the larger bone is broken, it falls backward, and this is one of those cases that you should not attempt.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	 "Then administer extension, straightening, and binding of the splints according to the same method.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	 "However, it is necessary that if the thigh fracture is jagged with many splinters, the extension should be less and lighter, and ease it with your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	 "And in the thigh there is one operation similar to that of the arm, which is when you have joined the splints and completed the entire procedure, then you will take wooden pegs, which are placed beneath the splints that are placed on the sole, and these are made exactly like palm branches; choose those with small thickness, not very thick, and let their length be according to the length of the thigh, and drive it in from the top to the bottom.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	 And then wrap around each leg in two layers of cloth according to its length, place one layer over the top of one thigh and the other over the opposite side, ensuring that they reach down to the lowest part of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	 And then bind the two thighs in three places: at both ends and in the middle, because with this binding the thigh is prevented from bending to the right or left, and it remains stable.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	 And a splint of wood is administered according to the length of the thigh; and it is placed on the leg to prevent it from moving.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	 And it is most important that you do this in cases of fracture, for with such injury it is called precisely.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 And then consider the thigh every day and study it for any changes, and guard against abscesses or swelling or other similar causes; and if you notice any such cause, then apply to it what is necessary until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	 On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	 The ankle does not always fracture completely; but the bones of the foot sometimes do fracture; and the toes of the foot rarely fracture, and they do not experience anything except attrition in their position.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	 And if the bones of the foot seem to have a fracture and you see these bones raised above themselves among each other, then place the patient's foot on the prepared ground as if they were walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	 Then place one foot on what is elevated from those bones, and then step on them, press down, and grind them until they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	 Then place a plaster and wool above it, and underneath the foot's sole, put a small board with two flat surfaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	 Then strengthen it with the foot using a straight bandage, after you have wrapped it with cloth and other materials needed for the treatment.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	 And after three or four days have passed, then you shall unbind the bandage, for you will find that the bones have been ground down or perhaps they are displaced or dislocated, and the operation on them is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	 But if some bones are displaced, then restore those and grind them as I have instructed you in the restoration of the hand's fingers.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	 Then place a splint on the displaced finger according to its length and slightly wider than it; then under the foot place this board that I have recommended to you, and strengthen it with a proper bandage.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	 And it is appropriate for you to not forget that you should consider all the causes that were mentioned to you in other treatises on accidents that we have discussed; and apply yourself to every accident with what is needed.
Capitol .xviii.	 ### Chapter XVIII
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	 ### On the Fracture of a Woman's Pelvis, the Penis Bone, and the Man's Shaft
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	 When the woman's pelvis is fractured, then have her sit in a squatting position, and afterwards incline her slightly to one side, and hold her from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	 Then the midwife should fill the pelvis with cotton, and it should be done in the woman's pelvis as described; and then the woman should be shaken, and her back should be raised little by little, because all this is forgotten until the fractured bone returns to its original position in front of the pelvis as described.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	 Then place cushions on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton with ease and then urinate, and replace and return it as you did at the beginning, and then return to the first cushion.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	 And do this for seven days or about that time, because by then it will be healed.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	 Sure, here's the translation of your provided sentence:
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	 And it should be filled with cotton and left in place for some days, as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	 And when the bones of a man's or woman's finger are broken, then administer in their restoration and alignment what we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	 And what is correct is not hidden in these nearby fractures and seldom happens, especially to one who has some education and knows how to use and understand this book of mine; for that fracture indicates to you the best position for correct restoration and fixation, so pay close attention.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	 But in the case of a man's penis when it is broken, take an egg white and put the penis into it; then place a cloth wrapping over it and let it be wrapped up, and then let it rest for three days or around that time, until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter XIX
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	 On the restoration of bones when there is an injury.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	 It is advisable for someone who has suffered a fracture with an injury, especially if the bone is large, such as the hip bone or thigh bone, or similar to that, that you bleed them and perform phlebotomy on them immediately if the conditions for phlebotomy are favorable to you, as we have said above.  (Note: "fleubotomia" is an old term for bloodletting)
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	 And if the wound is bleeding, then you should hold pressure on it so that you can sprinkle powdered dry eggshells on it, unless there is another reason present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	 And then begin to restore the broken bone on that same day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	 But if an abscess forms, then you should leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided. Do not approach it on the third and fourth days, for you will cause worse accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	 But if the broken bone protrudes over the skin and is exposed, then it is necessary to pierce it with a needle and level it with your hands with ease and slight extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	 But if the extension is not suitable and the balance of it with your hands, then you should reduce it with this instrument; and it is an instrument that is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers long, and its width according to the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of these, as many as are needed for all kinds of fractures in every way.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	 Based on the context and the similarities with modern Romance languages, here's my attempt at translating the given sentence into English:
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And this is how it is done:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	 And its name in Greek is "labret willingly help," which means a small shovel.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	 Because the end of it must be placed at an angle, raised over the protruding part of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	 And you should strike it once until the bone returns to its original position and is covered with some kind of poultice.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	 And so you should cover the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is thin and does not fit well with the instrument, then it is necessary for you to insert the end of that bone until the instrument has enough power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	 But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have mentioned, then insert it with whatever is suitable among the instruments that we have mentioned; or saw it off with one of the saws in any way possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	 Then scrape away what remains on the bone, the roughness and small fragments.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	 And when the bone is reduced, and if after the reduction the patient feels intense pain, you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what you can to bring great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	 When your treatment of the bone is complete, and at this point submerge a cloth in black stiptic wine, especially if it is summer, and do not apply wax or any other substance containing oil to the wound, so that it does not cause inflammation or corruption in him.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	 And at this time administer steel to the patient when you finish the bone treatment, and leave the wound uncovered so that flies can lay eggs, then use tweezers to remove the maggots and apply dressings according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	 And be very careful not to stretch the wound with the fracture, for it is said that many foolhardy doctors have done this and caused death or severe injury to their patients, which is unhealthy.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	 And if the wound has a slight swelling, soften it, unlike the swelling of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	 And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear that the aforementioned bad accidents might occur, and you feel pain in the area, then do not apply steel to it, but rather make a dressing of hard cloth instead of steel and stretch it with them.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	 And when after one day or two the wound begins to heal, which in him has generated a bruise, then you remove from him the cloth that you had placed over him with honey, and then apply calves, ointments with which according to our custom we treat wounds, such as tetrafarmacon ointment and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	 And it is necessary for you to unbind the bandage and examine the wound every day in the morning and evening until it is healed and firm, and it is important that the limb be prepared in such a way that the sore runs out of him towards the parts below with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	 If many days have passed and the wound is neither healed nor removed from him, then know that here are the effects of smallpox, so you should still examine the wound with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	 And from those effects, those that are separated, remove and extract them; those that are not separated and cause pain to the limb and make it swell, incise them as much as is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	 And if pus or fluid exudes from the wound, indicating suppuration or another type of corruption and putrefaction, then you should place one of those (remedies) on it which is suitable for him according to the treatment whose narrative has been told in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	 Here's my attempt at translating this sentence:
Capitol .xx.	 "Capitol .xx." translates to "Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	 "De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura." translates to:
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	 Sure, I'll attempt to translate the given medieval medical text into modern English:
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	 Based on the provided text and pattern, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	 On the restoration of fractures, when it is restored and then the member remains subtle and brittle, not according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	 When a bone fracture is restored, and the member remains subtle and brittle, it happens not without reason: one of these reasons is an excess of dissolution of the ligaments and their binding, which was not done as needed; or due to excessive tightness of the ligaments, preventing nourishment from reaching the member; or due to superfluous tightening; or because of excessive movement at the wrong time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and their weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	 The cure for this is to give the patient food and make their heart tender until the blood is replenished in them; administer baths; and introduce joy and happiness over them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	 And then place a plaster on the member, so that the plaster draws the necessary nourishment to it, or continue the moistening of it with warm water until the nourishment runs and the member returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	 On the treatment of gnawed bones, when they are restored crookedly and you prevent the operation from doing what is needed.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	 When the limb that has already been restored approaches its healing process due to tortuosity and prominence of the bone, and it is because of this that the shape of the limb is distorted, nevertheless the limb is not prevented from performing its natural operation, then you should not accept the word of someone who claims that the limb has been newly set.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	 However, there have been foolish physicians and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is very blameworthy, causing great fear, the sign of which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	 But if lameness and nodosity are recent, then they should be soaked in tepid water, into which have been cut mollifying herbs such as leaves of mallow and roots of mullein, and melilot, and similar to those; and let a poultice with mollifying properties be made for him, such as well-made diachylon; or take the powder of mullein root and mix it with egg white or oil of sweet almonds, and make a poultice with that; or take fat figs and mash them with pigeon dung, and similar to those of the medicines which are called ammans consolidacium.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	 E algunas veces se disuelve con un frotamiento suave y constante, realizado con las manos húmedas, y se debe mover el miembro en todas direcciones durante todo el tiempo.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	 Más si la tortuosidad ya ha avanzado y se ha vuelto fuerte y convertido en piedra, y se requiere un tratamiento con hierro, entonces es necesario que el pus sea evacuado y que la continuidad del hueso sea disuelta. Se debe cortar lo que sobra del nudo de ese miembro con tijeras finas, y se debe administrar facilidad en esa parte con solicitud y estudio.
Capitol .xxiii.	 Capítulo XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	 Sobre el desplazamiento (dislocación).
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	 La dislocación es el desplazamiento de alguna de las articulaciones de su lugar, lo que impide el movimiento, distorsiona la forma del miembro y causa dolor y grandes daños al paciente.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	 Por lo tanto, cuando ocurre una dislocación, es necesario actuar rápidamente para reducirla y no demorar en hacerlo. Si se tarda, el lugar se llena de pus y es muy difícil realizar la reducción de la dislocación.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	 And for this reason, it is not necessary for the patient to be moved or stretched during the time of sleep, because many times it brings on spasms and toothaches.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	 But when this happens, you should go to the patient's bedroom, and immediately lay them down on their back so that they can rest; then wrap the affected member in warm water and oil, and gently reduce it.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	 And let every member be treated with the water from which the memory will come to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	 And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation as follows, after fracture; from the highest part of the body down to the lowest part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 Chapter 24
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	 Of the cure for dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	 Both jaws can be dislocated; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are moved from their places by a small distance and softened somewhat, or they are completely dislocated so that they are softened at the joint until the patient drools saliva and cannot hold it or close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in its own flesh.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	 When the dislocation is minor, it usually returns to its original position on its own with little effort.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	 But if the dislocation is complete and fully realized, then it is necessary to apply a slight reduction to it promptly, without delaying at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 And the attendant should hold the patient's head, while the doctor inserts his thumb of one hand into the mouth of the patient, placing it on the dislocated condyle of the jaw if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides. The doctor should then grasp the patient's chin with his other hand and command the patient to relax their jaw muscles and allow them to move in whatever direction they wish. Then the doctor should gently guide the mandible until it returns to its proper position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	 And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer a purgative with hot water and oil until a slight reduction of both is made and the reduction of both is not delayed at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	 And when they are returned and secured, and the patient's mouth is closed and not relaxed, then place on those little pouches of cloth with wax, made from beeswax and rose oil; and then bind them gently with soft bandages.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	 And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be supported between two pillows so that it does not move to the right or left; and do not force them to chew anything. When their food has been cut into small pieces, until the pain has subsided and the jaws are loose, then they may eat whatever they want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	 And this should be administered gently, and do not work or speak through the mouth while eating, drinking, and talking, until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	 And if the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult and they are not returned to their places, then great care should be taken to avoid fevers and constant sweating, and quickly raise the patient's belly, and quickly induce vomiting of pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	 And when you see this, then know that it is fatal; and great care should be taken because he who experiences this will die within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	 On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the end of the clavicle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	 The collarbone is not dislocated from the inside of the chest due to its connection with the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated on the outside, which can be determined by touch.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	 And the recovery of the patient is that he should lie on his back and extend his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	 Then immediately close the area with your palm using strong pressure, because it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	 Then place a poultice and powder on that area and bind it tightly.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	 But if the end of that which is the elbow and is continuous with it is not dislocated, then it should be reduced and splinted as we have said, according to your ability.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	 Then place a poultice and powder on that area, bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to remain calm and at rest until healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	 And with this same treatment is reduced the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter .26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	 About reducing the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	 Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated from the attachment at the base to the attachment below.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	 The second is that it is dislocated from the attachment above the muscle, and this occurs late; and it is not dislocated at the attachments behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the attachments in front of the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	 And especially if it is dislocated and has exited from the joints, you should tickle it, especially in those [joints] where there are few fleshy parts; it is easily dislocated. But in those [joints] where there are many fleshy parts, it exits with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	 "And if a strong blow or fall occurs to some men, and the muscle of them becomes swollen with an acute inflammation, it is believed that this is due to a dislocation.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	 "Therefore, it is necessary for you to be sure about this before you proceed with the treatment of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	 "And it is known that the dislocation of him occurs at the joints where you should tickle; in order to distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find concavity at the head of the muscle, and after tickling it, touch the head of the muscle like an egg, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear, nor can they move it any further.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	 "If it is dislocated in the foot or ankle, you will find a clearly discernible swelling that is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	 "And this dislocation can be easily reduced when it is recent and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	 "And the reduction of it is that the practitioner raises the patient's hand to the upper parts; and then places their fingers under the ticklish part of them, and lifts the joint strongly back into its place, and the practitioner raises the patient's hand, and extends it outward; and then places it down because it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	 Certainly! Let's translate the text line by line into English:
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	 Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given text into English:
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	 If the patient is light, then it is necessary that with him who causes another be suspended, so that he becomes heavy, because the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 And it is reduced in another way: which is that a long post be fixed in the ground, the top of which is round in shape, like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and then the patient is placed under it; since cloths are placed on top of the post's head, and the patient stands according to the length of the post, and then his hand is extended towards the part below the other part; and his body is stretched in the opposite direction with strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	 And if it is difficult to reduce him for all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this treatment: which is that you take a post whose length is two arms long, and its width be four fingers, and its thickness be less towards the top like this:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	 And then round cloths should be tied on top to prevent the post from hurting the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	 Then the patient should be placed under the top of the post, and their hand or arm should be extended onto the post up to the fingertips. And the post should be tied around the arms and hands at the wrist.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	 Approach and place the arms on a ladder step according to the size, with the hand extended towards the lower parts, and let the other thing be suspended from the other side, because the joint is about to enter.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	 When the entry of it is completed according to whatever manner possible for you, then place a small woolen pillow beneath; and next, apply a plaster made from powder of mills with onion juice and egg white over all the muscle, wrapped around it; and next, strengthen the pillow tightly; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and his hand should be attached to his neck, and he should be left alone, and his hand should not be moved for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	 It is necessary that the patient's food be scarce until the member is comforted, because it is easier for his healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	 Then the food should be given more abundantly after seven or five days and he should be made to move; and thus if it is fixed and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	 But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that affects him or for another reason, then it is necessary that a cautery with three holes be administered to it, as was said before in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	 And if all this is done and after approximately seven days the bandage and joint are not healed, and the dressing and the stricture have been applied several times, and it still is not healed but instead, he cannot raise that arm to its original position, then you should know that his nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, are either cut, stretched, or softened, and you should know that the joint will never return to its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	 Regarding the dislocation that occurs in the foot and ankle or the back of the leg, reduction is done with traction and extension by hand until it returns to its place.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And then apply the other bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	 And if there is heaviness in the limb and slowness of its movement after healing, then let the patient take warm baths several times until that heaviness is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	 On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	 Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most often to the front from the back, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because it appears below the armpit or below the touch according to whatever shape it is dislocated in. And when you set the dislocated shoulder with the hand, this is clearly indicated to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor can that muscle touch its own place.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	 And it is necessary that you cut and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it reaches the acute stage, because if it reaches the acute stage, reduction will be difficult and a severe injury will not heal completely; especially when it occurs in the posterior joints, for this type of dislocation is worse than all others, more painful, and many times people die from it.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	 And its restoration, when it is possible to reduce [the dislocation], is that the patient's hand be extended with two hands, and his arm be spread, and the doctor's hands be on the elbow from below, and he pushes the joint with the fingers of both his hands together, or with the back of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	 But if the dislocation is in the anterior joints, then return [the limb] by bending the hand with his own hand until it strikes the elbow with the back of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	 And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vigorous extension and great force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	 And it is that two assistants extend the arm, and hold it in this manner by two assistants so that it is not moved away from the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	 And then turn the arms completely around, because they are wrapped in a long folded cloth on his hand or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	 And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this helps to lubricate the joint for ease; and then press on the joint with strong pressure until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	 And then for the reduction of the swelling, it should be placed on a poultice in which there is astringency and dryness with egg white, and it should be pulled tightly downward, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	 And then untie it; and so if the joint is formed in its proper place, then you may unbind him and leave it alone.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	 And if you see that the joint is not yet strong, then you should repeat the poultice and the binding, and leave it for several days until it is strengthened; and then unbind it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	 But if there is gravity after the reduction of the joint, and his condition is in motion, then administer moistening with a bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or place on the joint aleliates, which are thick cushions; and then bind it, and leave it on the bones day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	 And then remove that [cloth or bandage], and place him in a bath; and when he gets out, then you should rub the joint with warm friction, and then repeat on that area, as if it were moving, once, and the second time, and the third time.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	 In the middle of the bath, until he is thoroughly cleansed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	 And if you wish, place a wet and scraped cowhide on that opening and secure it with a bandage over it; do this several times, because that [cowhide] is moist and will bring the area back to its proper condition.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	 About treating a dislocation of the shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	 A dislocation of the hand can sometimes occur, and its reduction is easy, unlike other joints. However, it is important that the reduction be done quickly in the hour in which it was dislocated, before the site becomes swollen or a swelling occurs there.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 The reduction of the dislocation is done by placing the patient's hand joint on a table and having them extend their hand. The physician then places their hand or palm over the top of the joint and presses until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	 And therefore, if it returns quickly, it is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a compress to drain the abscess and leave it; and do not repeat this, for if you do, neither will you tolerate nor be able to endure the reduction of the pus that passes throughout the day.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	 But the joint remains according to its twisted nature; and do not attribute any cause to the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then know that the nerves are pinched or squeezed, and there is no remedy for it except to strengthen it with a cautery near its seat and give it some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	 Therefore, when the illness has returned, then place on it the compress which we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for 5 days; and afterward, it should be loosened and let out, and the patient's hand should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	 But if the patient's movement is stopped and some gravity occurs in them, then relieve that with hot water and rubbing several times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	 Of the treatment of dislocation in the said joints.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	 Sometimes the said joints are dislocated entirely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	 When one of these fingers is dislocated on the back of the palm or the front of it, then hold the finger steady and use your thumbs to push the dislocation back until it returns to its original position.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	 Then support the head of the finger and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and let it hang for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	 Then suspend it and extend it until it is properly straightened in its own time.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	 And at night, bandage it according to that method, and do not stop unbinding it during the day and exercising with movements, and bandage it again at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	 And do the same with it, if it is dislocated on the back of the hand, and bandage it to that part and do with it the same first operation until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	 Do the same for dislocations in other parts as well.
Capitol .xxx.	 Chapter .30
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	 About the treatment of spinal dislocations on the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	 When a full dislocation of one of the spine's vertebrae on the back or neck occurs and many vertebrae are moved from their places, in that case there is no cure, for death comes to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	 "Therefore, when that area has already been moved to the back parts and is called jaundice.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	 "But the treatment of it is that you must then consider if the jaundice is due to childbirth, because in this case there is no cure or recovery at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	 "But for those cases that come about due to a fall or a blow or something similar to these, the ancients have already spoken about the methods of treatment at length, from which one derives the most profit; but I have abbreviated it, retaining only the essentials and avoiding excessive detail, in order to make my presentation more accessible. With this method, I will now explain and discuss the following.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	 "And I say that in the case of jaundice occurring in the front part of the foot, there is neither origin nor cure for it; and similarly for that which is caused by two causes.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	 "And none of those can be cured except for the one that occurs in the back specifically, as I will explain.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	 "And the patient should be laid face down on a soft cushion near a wall, and a wet cloth should be placed beneath him so that his feet are not lifted.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	 And then place a straight pole in the ground at the head end of the bed near the patient's head, and another pole at the foot end of the bed under the patient's feet.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	 And let one assistant hold the pole and not fix it in a hole; and another assistant should hold the other one similarly.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 Then wrap around the patient's head and under their chin tie a band firmly; extend the end of the band to the pole near their head, and tie it there; then strengthen another band over their hips and at the back of their knees, and under their thighs; then adjust all the bands and tie them to the other pole near their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	 Then let each assistant extend the band to the edge of the pole, and the two poles and their bands should not be moved from their places where they are placed, but rather should remain unfixed as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	 And the doctor should place his palms on the patient's back with strength until he returns to consciousness, or place something over that, and then adjust his feet on the table until he returns to consciousness.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	 But if he does not return to consciousness with this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three spans, and carve out a place in the wall near where we said the patient is located, so that the end of the table fits into it.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	 And then place the majority of the table over the spine, and the doctor should place his feet on the other end of the table, and tighten it securely so that the spine is straightened and returns to its proper place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	 And if you wish to do this, open the bed that is revolving with your hand; and if you want to place the patient's head at the foot of two posts, let the length of each post be one arm's length, and also place the patient's head at the foot of two more posts; and let the distance between each pair of posts be one palm's width. And in each post, make a hole through which a cord can pass, and let each post be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	 And there should also be a round post through which the cord passes, and this post should be turned in the holes of the two posts.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	 And at the end of it is a hole through which the post, whose length is one palm, is turned; and in the two other posts, there should be something similar to this.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 Then tighten the ropes that you have tied to the patient's feet in the hole where his head should be placed, and the ropes that you have tied to his hips in the cord where his feet should be placed.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	 And then you should have one servant for each turn who turns the patient with their hand, and the doctor should check the spine as we mentioned.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	 And this is how the turn should be done:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	 And then, after the spine is turned and the area is checked, you should place a desiccating poultice made with egg white, and then cover it; and then place on top of the poultice a board whose width is about three fingers or so, and whose length covers the swollen area and extends to the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	 And then bind it with the bandage mentioned earlier, and feed the patient nourishing food until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	 And if there is any swelling remaining in the area after healing, then medicines that soften and cleanse should be administered along with a long-term diet as we recommended earlier; and in that area, a lead sheet has already been applied.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	 And sometimes swelling occurs at the end of the spine in the back, and it is believed to be caused by dislocation; and that bone is called the one that swells because it should not be treated with this medicine, as it will cause you to die.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter 31
De curacio de anca dislocada.	 About the treatment of dislocated hips.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	 Know that the hip joint and the muscular joint should only be considered as a dislocation and nothing more than what happens to other smaller or less convex joints.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	 And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways: by displacement inside, or by displacement outside, or by displacement in front, or by displacement behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	 And it is most often dislocated by displacement inside, and rarely by displacement in front or behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	 And the sign of its dislocation inside is that, when you align the healthy leg with the patient's leg, it is longer and the thigh is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot backwards, and in this place there will be an inflammation of cold aposteme, because the head of the bone has already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	 And the sign that it is dislocated by displacement outside is that its symptoms are contrary to this symptom.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	 And the sign of one who has dislocation by displacement in front is that he extends his thigh according to its course, but however cannot bend it without pain in the thigh, and if he forces himself to walk, he cannot go forward; and his urine is retained and his groin is swollen, and he walks on his ankles.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	 And the sign of that person to whom dislocation occurs in the back parts is that they cannot expand their knee nor can they bend it as much as they could before the injury, and their thigh is shorter than the other, and the knee becomes softened, and the head of the thighbone is displaced from its place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	 But the reduction of this type of dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and ancient, and if it has already been treated by others before you, then administer reduction accordingly to its condition, but in such a case, not all curative measures are necessary; therefore, it is not advisable to proceed hastily.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	 However, in the case of recent dislocation and it is one of the four types of dislocations, then you should approach it so that you return the joint and extend it to its inner and outer parts, and move it to the right and left, for it will quickly return to normal and no other treatment is needed.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	 But if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare strong assistants and extend the patient's leg from below the knee, either with their hands or with a bandage that is tied above the knee; and another assistant should extend the hand of the patient so that they place their hands below his thighs; and then immediately tie the end of the bandage over the top of the thigh, and another assistant should hold the free end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	 And if the extension of it or the part inside the elbow is to the inside of the fork, or the part behind is to the back.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	 And if all of these are present at once, then raise the patient up off the ground with his body and let him remain hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	 And this type of extension is common to all four [limbs].
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	 And therefore, if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then everything that has been said about proper treatment is necessary.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	 In the reduction of itself, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is on the inside parts, it is necessary that the patient be placed supine on his back; and then place the bandages over the front of the thigh in the area between the head of the thigh and the place below the elbow; and then extend the bandage from above the part of the elbow to the highest part of the fork.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	 And then another strong assistant should take the patient's arms and firmly grasp the thick part of the injured thigh and strongly extend it outward, for this returns it to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	 And this type is easier to treat when this limb is reduced than the other types.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	 "But if you are unable to comply with this treatment and do not follow it precisely, then the patient's two feet should be bound tightly and lightly together at both ankles and both heels.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	 "And let the length of each be four fingers' width, and let the sick leg be extended more than the other by two fingers' width.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	 "And then the patient should be suspended upside down over the top of a pole, and they should be in this position; and let their length from the ground be two arms' length.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 "And then command a strong young man to lessen the space of the cushion, and let another young man be suspended with the patient, and the other young man should push the cushion forcefully, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	 "But in the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation that has moved outward, it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back as we have recommended; and let the bandage be strengthened especially on the sick leg and on his feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	 "And then two poles should be placed, one under his feet and the other under his head; and then thin poles should be placed in the middle of the cushion, covered with wet cloths so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being between his thighs, because you must ensure that the extension at the sides is not impeded.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	 And each assistant extends his part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	 Therefore, if the patient obeys the reversal, it will be very good; and if not, place a bandage on them firmly and proceed as we have said earlier in this treatise.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	 However, it is advisable for the patient to lie on his side quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	 And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is advisable that the thigh be slightly extended and according to this same narrative, place it on a stool; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand over the patient's knee, and then presses it with the other hand, and with that pressure, he extends the part behind towards the back of the knee.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	 And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then it is not advisable that the patient be extended backwards, and he should be elevated off the ground; rather, it is necessary for him to be placed on a hard surface, just as we have said about the lifting if his hip is dislocated towards the outside, according to what we have said about placing him on two hips; and it is on his face and the ligaments are extended, as we have said, there is not much.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	 And it is necessary that a compression with a board be applied over the area where the joint is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	 And when the reduction is completed as it should be — and you do not see any sign of the reduction on the patient, and you have extended both legs of the patient, and when you see that they are bent and the patient extends their leg without excuse, then you know that the member has returned as it should — at this point you prepare two cushions, apply a poultice and compress with a bandage in such a way that the swelling is not increased on any side; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	 And then remove the bandage and poultice, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	 At this point, if you see them straightened, then you know that the dislocation has already been stabilized, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	 And if you see any sign of softening, then return and apply a poultice to it, and extend it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	 And then remove that, and make the patient delay walking on each one for some days, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	 De doloribus membrorum.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	 "Chapter XXXII. On the pain of limbs.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	 The eye is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outer parts, and to the inner parts, and more often to the rear parts; but it cannot be dislocated to the front parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	 And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to apply his thigh to his hip; then you will know that the eye is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	 And the restoration of all its kinds is that you make the patient lie flat, so that he can extend his thigh if possible; then adhere your thumb to his face, and place his foot between your feet; then make your thumbs adhere to his eye with your fingers, and press these strongly on his eye with strength, and another minister extends his foot until the eye returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	 And the sign of reduction is that his thigh adheres to his hip with easy effortlessness.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 Then plaster that [area] and make the thigh adhere to the hip, and then bind both together at the same time with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbind them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	 And do not let the patient walk for some days, until he is healed and strengthened.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	 But if the reduction of him to you is necessary, then administer strong extension with ligaments as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter .33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	 Of the treatment of talus dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	 The talus is sometimes moved by a slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the joint, and its dislocation occurs either at the internal or external parts of the joint.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	 And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the talus swelling towards the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	 But the treatment of its reduction is easy, and that it be extended with ease by the hands and then covered until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	 But in the treatment of it when it is dislocated according to the joint, it is necessary that you make the patient lie down straight, and let him have a strong and skilled assistant behind his back in the middle of his body.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	 And then you take with your right hand the foot from the higher part, and with your left hand from the lower part of the foot at the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	 And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with the left for two times, and then extend it with the left; and rub the sole of the foot with the right behind the knee without effort.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	 And do this twice as we have said.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	 And then rub the sole of the foot against the leg the third time, and you should be at the knee.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	 Therefore, if you return once or twice in this manner, and if you see the foot swollen, that is good; but if not, then repeat the procedure on him, for that returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	 But if you are prohibited from reducing him with what we have recommended, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and tie a strong rope firmly to the ground, and let it pass between his thighs, and you have already wrapped him in cloth so that the patient does not slip.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	 And then let one of his servants hold his thighs, and then another servant extend the foot with his hands or with a rope that lies on the ankle; and then let each servant stretch against the extension of his partner, and let the rope be stretched between the patient's thighs holding him, so that his body is not pulled to the sides beyond its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	 And immediately the doctor pushes the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant holds the healthy joint below, because the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	 And when the dislocation returns and it is clear to you that the reduction of the patient is complete, then place a plaster and bind it strongly with bandages, and tie the foot to the leg with a bandage.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	 And you must be careful or guard against the nerves that are behind the ankle, because the bandage over it should not be too tight and should hold it firmly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	 And then leave it for two days or three; and if the bandage has softened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	 And then unbind it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	 But if the patient is forced to walk within that period, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	 And if it happens that an abscess forms, then you should administer in the suppuration of it what was previously said in another part of the treatise about treatment and poultices, until it is removed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	 Chapter XXXIV
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	 On the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	 It should be enveloped with a small bandage without causing much difficulty; indeed, this is easier than difficult.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	 However, if the dislocation is in any of the toes at the back of the foot, then you should make the patient sit with their foot on a flat surface or table, and they should be sitting as if walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	 Then you should stand on the toes of the patient, placing your foot on the joint where it protrudes, and press down with your foot until it returns to its original position, ensuring that it appears wrapped and not protruding.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	 Then place under the sole of the patient's foot a board that supports the entire foot, which has two handles, and bind it tightly and firmly for three days; then unbind it and have the patient rest from walking for several days, until it is healed and the recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter XXXV
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	 On the types of dislocation that occur with wounds, or fractures, or both together.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	 When any of these causes occur, and you undertake the treatment and restoration of it, many times death occurs. ️
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	 Sure, I'd be happy to help translate that. Here it is:
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	 And then immediately strive to make a reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before an abscess is formed.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	 And then if the member returns as we wish, administer a regimen that prevents an abscess and treats the wound with suitable drying ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	 And if there is dislocation with fracture and the shin bones are separated, then pierce their marrow, and do what we have said in simple illnesses concerning this, as preceded in those places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	 And be careful and avoid according to your ability that which is contrary to the ways of fear, as my preceding words have instructed you; for this is better for you in obedience to your Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and healthier for your true body during your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	 Thus ends the words of Albucasis, may God be blessed with them.
Amen.	 Amen.
