Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	 Here begins the words of Al-Bukhari.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	 O, sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the knowledge of medicine, and its completion has achieved its purpose, and through its explanations and clarifications, it seems to me that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is a section of the operation by hand, which is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	 For the operation by hand is suppressed in our region and in our time, it has been greatly neglected, and its knowledge has been lost; only a few descriptions remain in the books of the Ancients, which have changed many [things] and have come to errors and confusion, so that their intentions are closed and its strength and art are lengthened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	 And it seems to me that I should revive [the operation by hand] with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of explanation and clarification and abbreviation; and so that it may come in the form of cautery tools and other instruments of the work as it is for the addition of clarification, and for its preparation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	 But the reason why a good craftsman with his hand is not found in this our time is because the art of medicine is long, and its practitioner must first be trained in the science of anatomy, which counts Galen among those who knew the position of the members and their forms, and their connection and separation; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves and sinews, and their number, and their arrangement; and of the pulsating veins and the still ones, and the places of their outlet.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	 And for this, Hippocrates says that with a name it is nothing, but in the work little, and mainly in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	 But we have already spoken of that in the beginning of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy will fall into error by which many people die, as I have seen happen too often. For some are educated in this science and then disregard it without knowledge or experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	 For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor cut an apostema scrophulous on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries of the neck so that a great amount of blood flowed out until the woman died in his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	 And I saw another doctor who took it upon himself to remove a stone from a man who was in a bad state, and the stone was large. He tried to pull out that stone with a piece of the bladder, which caused that man to die on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	 And I had been called to remove that stone, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew for certain that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	 And then release him according to his desires, and then bind him again, and let him lie dry for some days, and command that we untie the bandage; and thus enter until the space and the foot were inflamed, and it came to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	 And I was called to him, and prepared to untie the bandage, and then calmness was achieved and thus he admitted his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	 However, corruption had already taken hold in the member, so it could not be restrained, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the member until the patient was in danger.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	 And I saw another doctor who punctured a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after some days, until the evil of it was greatly magnified in him.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	 The cause of which is that the cancerous tumor is full of melancholic humor, so it is not necessary for it to be cut out entirely, but only enough to be hosted by the member in its entirety.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	 And for this reason, my sons, it is necessary for you that the operation be divided into two parts: one is the operation associated with health, and the other is the work in which the greatest danger lies.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	 And I have already mentioned this in every part of this book where an operation occurs that involves error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against this and leave it, so that the pages do not find a way to speak and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	 And therefore take up your weapons with diligence and under the protection of God, and your patients with joy and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	 And use the best method through the grace of God to achieve healing and praiseworthy success, and abandon the terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure, and keep your weapons away from what makes you afraid, so that reliance on your faith and your name does not escape you: for greater is your glory, both in this world and forever after your holiness.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	 France has already been dissected in some of its monasteries:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	 "Do not treat evil patients, lest you be called evil doctors.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	 And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	 Here begins the division of the book, and firstly of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	 The first chapter is about the head, particularly concerning the shapes of instruments and the irons of cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	 The division of the second section.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The second chapter on incisions and punctures, as well as cupping therapy, pustules, extraction of arrows and similar matters, all categorized and organized according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	 Division of the third section.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The third chapter on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; a chapter organized from head to toe, including the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	 On cauterization with fire and sharp medicine, and remembering the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	 With this begins the entire treatise of the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	 It should be noted that I will explain the qualities of the preparations for this cautery and its contraindications, as well as in which complexity it is prohibited to cauterize.  (A more natural translation might be: "I want to discuss the qualities of the preparations for this cautery and its contraindications, as well as the conditions under which cauterization is prohibited.")
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	 Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the preparations for cautery and its contraindications is a long and detailed discourse, subtle in science and secretly hidden; and many wise men have already spoken about it, disagreeing among themselves. For me to repeat all their discourses would be too lengthy.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	 And therefore I say that you should apply cautery universally to any condition with or without matter, except for two conditions which are called cold conditions without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	 In a cold and dry condition with matter, you will disagree; for some say that cautery is beneficial for that, while others say the opposite about it, that cautery is not suitable for an illness caused by heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate that a cold and dry illness with water that is hot and dry be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	 And I disagree with those who say the opposite about this, that by cautery every cold and dry illness that occurs in the body of men is helped; for when you compare the human body and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find the human body to be cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	 And I say by this reasoning that experience has already shown me many times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	 However, it is not necessary to dwell on this matter which has already been proven and practiced in the chapter on cautery by previous practice, and he knows the diversity of human conditions and the nature of illnesses within them, as well as their causes and accidents, and the time span for them.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	 In other cases, there is no need to worry about it, especially in damp and cold ailments, because all doctors agree on this, and they do not disagree on the use of cautery for these.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	 And know, children, that concerning the secret of healing through fire and its goodness, it is agreed upon to use burning cautery in medicine, because fire is simple and its action only reaches the member being cauterized and not other adjacent members except for slight harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	 However, the action of medicine applied through burning spreads to adjacent members, and it quickly brings healing to the sick member that is difficult to heal and quickly helps.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	 But fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not cause this except for superfluities. And it is known to us through experience and long years of service in studying the art, concerning the truth of causes; and therefore I am excused from lengthy discourse. And if it were not that my book is not read here, I would have hidden a secret with fire and the quality of its operation in the body and its expulsion by which it expels sicknesses, with philosophical demonstrative discourse, which would be sharpened in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	 And know, children, that they disagree about the time in which it is appropriate to make a cautery and they consider the best time to be spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	 And I say that cautery is appropriate at any time, because the harm caused by the unfortunate circumstance of time is submerged in the benefit that comes from applying the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for painful or necessary pains, such as fistulas, which do not tolerate delay, lest something worse should happen.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	 And this should not be in your thoughts, O children, because only the common people and foolish doctors think this way, as if to say that the ailment which is cured by cautery does not recur at all times, and they consider this outcome.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	 And the reason is not as they think, because cautery is only used in places where medicine cannot reach to change the complexion and dry out the humidity that causes pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	 But nevertheless, cautery is superior to medicine in its strength and the effectiveness of its operation, as well as the greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	 And it is possible that his ailment may return at some point in time, according to the patient's complexion and the location of his ailment, as well as his strength and what has been prepared in his body for the accumulation of excesses within him, and what he has received in his diet from similar causes; unless the ailment treated with cautery is a subtle ailment with few superfluities and humors, such as a tooth cautery for pain, it is possible that the pain will not return to him. But this only happens rarely.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	 And it is commonly said that the cautery is the last resort in medicine, and this is a correct statement, for I do not understand why they apply it, since I believe it is not a cure that benefits either with medicine or with any other means except cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	 And the reason is contrary to that; and the belief that cautery is the last resort in medicine only applies when one administers various methods of treatment for certain illnesses, and those medicines do not confer benefits, and therefore at the end of the process one administers cautery, and it is beneficial for that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	 And from this one can see that cautery is the last resort in medicine, not according to the opinion that I understand the common people and too many foolish doctors hold.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	 And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	 And they said that the place of cautery does not burn, although this is not absolutely true, for I have already proven and found that it does so only in some bodies without the others, and cautery with that is good and better than with iron as well; however when you make a cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, for it ignites according to the quantity that you want by the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive friction. And if you place on it a flame, the gold melts from the fire, and some flakes fall into the fire due to the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	 And for that reason, you should make the cautery with iron in a way that is as gentle and precise as possible for the operation to proceed correctly.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	 And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those from the head to the feet, so that I can provide what is needed for him.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	 On the cautery of head pain caused by cold and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	 The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	 This cauterization is effective against moisture and cold, which are two causes of the said accident, being the cause of soda and many rheumatic fluxes called rhinitis, which flows from the head to the area around the eyes and ears, much sleepiness, toothache and sore throat, and universally for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda and apoplexy, and similar conditions in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	 The way to perform this cauterization is as follows: first, instruct the patient to be evacuated with a purgative that cleanses the head for three or four nights, depending on the strength of the patient and their age and habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	 And then instruct him to shave his head with a razor, and then make that seated patient sit between your hands on a bench and place his feet on it.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	 And then place the palm of your hand gently on his nose between his eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	 But once your finger reaches the middle of the nose, mark that spot with ink, and then use a cautery tool shaped like an olive leaf.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	 Then place that [cautery tool] on the marked spot and press down gently, gradually increasing pressure with your other hand, and rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	 Then gently lift your hand and look at the spot. If you see any bone exposed, even as small as a grain of sand, then stop and lift your hand. If not, continue with that iron, or another one if it has become cold, until you see the bone as I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	 Then take a little salt and dissolve it in water, then apply it to the spot for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	 Then place a cloth soaked in vinegar on it and leave it there until the scar of the burn is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	 Then treat the spot with Tetrapharmacum ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	 And they also say that the longer the wound remains open, the better the arm will be healed, because it is more beneficial and helpful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	 And some of them say that the tendon should be cauterized within the bone, and the cautery should be held in place until a portion of the bone's substance is burnt off.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	 And then it should be scraped and cleaned of anything attached to the bone, and then it should be treated.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	 And others say that with the cautery one should reach the very back, until it presses strongly into the bone, causing it to break, and this is the method of small apoplexy:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	 And they believe that from that place, the vapors of the head are expelled.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	 And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is healed.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	 But I have not seen these two types of cautery in all cases, only in some men according to the way of fear; and let him be, in my opinion, better with health than without it, for the head is weakened by the breaking of its continuity, just as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a cold nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	 And the first type of cautery, in my opinion, is safer and better; and with this I end and with this I work for health.
Capitol segon.	 "Second Chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	 "About Cautery of the Head
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	 "When the entire head experiences chronic and prolonged pain, and the patient is using helmets, compresses, head purges, plasters, cups, bandages, and similar remedies, especially if he has already been cauterized with a cautery that causes scarring and does not benefit him at all from any of these causes, then consider whether the patient's head is naturally strong in its constitution; and it is not delicate but finds much cold, then that one should be cauterized with another cautery beside that one a little.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	 "Then cauterize him on the crown of his head with a cautery until the membrane is opened.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	 "Incise the membrane and expose as much bone as we mentioned earlier, then cauterize him with a cautery on the back of the head in the place called 'vas' — and this is the location where a cupping glass is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	 "And be careful with this, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find great pain from this, different from the pain of all other head cauteries.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	 "And I say this about the location of this cautery, because the cautery used for the crown of the head and the occiput should be more delicate than the one used for the middle of the head; and this is how it should be done.
Capitol ters.	 Based on the context provided and similarities with Romance languages, "Capitol ters" likely translates to:
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	 Of the recent cautery for migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	 When the pain in the head is severe, or it extends to the eyes, evacuate the head with cleansing medicines and administer the other treatment that I have mentioned in the discussions of illnesses; if this does not help, then cautery on him is done in two ways: either cauterization with a sharp burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	 But cauterization with a burning medicine is done by taking a woolen cloth and cleaning it well and tying off its ends on both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	 Then you must cut the painful area in the temple with a sharp lancet, until it reaches the bone, so that it is hidden underneath.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	 Then press strongly on it with a stopper to increase the pressure, and leave it for the space of three hours; then remove it and take out the wool, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then place over it a cloth soaked in wine vinegar until the area becomes warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	 And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written in the treatise of twelve burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 But in cauterization with iron according to this manner: here is how it's done with the cautery, and this is its form.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	 and it is called a nail-like hook, because the head of it is like a small flower in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small projection.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	 Then place [the cautery] over the area of pain, and hold your hand—so that the bow does not get burned, which is below—and rotate the iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	 And if the quantity [of skin] burned by the tip of the cautery is as much as half of it, lift your hand so that the blood vessel below is not burned, to prevent bleeding from occurring.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And then soak a cloth in salt water and place it on the area, and leave it for three days; and then place a cloth with padding, and then treat with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	 And if you wish, cauterize with the blade of the scalpel according to this manner, and be careful not to cut the artery in this area especially.
Capitol quart.	 Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	 On the Cauterization of an Old Wound.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	 When you treat migraine with the water we have mentioned in the previous treatment, and as we have mentioned in the divisions of illnesses, and if the treatment does not work, sometimes due to the illness not responding to what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then you must heat the scalpel cautery until it is red-hot. This indicates the place of pain along a line equal to the length of the majority finger, or whichever one; and place your hand once and press firmly until you reach the artery and it penetrates into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	 However, it is necessary for you to be careful of the continuation of the jawbone, which becomes thicker due to chewing, and that the ligament is not attached there and the nerves that cause pain in that area do not become spastic.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	 And if it is concerning the safety and caution of blood flow from the artery that is cut, because in its cutting there is fear, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not trained or experienced; leave the operation to one who has experience at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	 And I come with the reminder of the management of bleeding from the artery according to its own manner in its place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	 And if you go, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on the tension of archery with cauteries having two blades, and this is a better cauterization and more effective.
Capitol .v.	 Chapter V:
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	 About the cauterization for earaches.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When the ear hurts due to cold and is not cured with purgative remedies or other treatments mentioned in the division, then apply the cautery, which is called puncture. Here is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	 Then pierce close to the fire and guide it around the entire ear as if turning a wheel, or in a circle on each side if the pain is on one side.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	 Hold the cautery near the edge of the ear, gradually approaching the spot to be cauterized.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	 And if the cautery has two points, apply one after the other, and then treat the places until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	 Chapter VI
De cauterizacio de turtura.	 About the cauterization for sore throat.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	 Sore throat, which is cured with cauterization, occurs only due to the humors that come through phlegm, as mentioned in the division of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	 "Avoid cauterization of the spine due to dryness or nerve spasm.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	 "When you heal that kind of throat with jars and purgatives and gargles, and your cure does not succeed, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	 "Place your cautery opposite the affected area, because softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	 "And the method of cauterization is that you cauterize him with a cautery at the right end of the ear, higher by a little above the top of the head, and on the temple another, whose length should be according to the length of the thumb, and place your hand with the cautery until it has burned half the thickness of the tendon.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	 "And this is the form of the cautery, and it is similar to a knife, whose form is shown below.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	 "However, it must be more subtle than a knife, as one sees, and the excessive thickness should be cut off somewhat.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for the area with water that is previously processed until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	 Chapter 7.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	 On the Cautery of Ancient Apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	 When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with the water we mentioned and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize them with four cauteries: on both corners of their head; and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we said; and with a cautery on the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	 And the manner of the cautery is done as it was said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	 And now that you have cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and it is worse afterward, then care for it with processed water.
Capitol .viii.	 Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	 On the Cautery of Forgetfulness Caused by Fever.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	 Give to the patient at the beginning large cups and pills to cleanse the humors.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	 Then shave all of the patient's head and place on their nape an ointment of wax, as described in the treatise on ointments.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	 And apply it several times, for that is the manner of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	 And do this according to the aforementioned order that I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	 And so if by that [treatment] the patient is cured; and if not, then make three cauteries on the lower part of his head, which should be descending from the highest part of the head down to the lowest part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	 And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then cure the cautery with the water that has been prepared.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	 But if the swelling increases and the patient is tolerating it, then make a cautery in the middle of the place; and if the swelling is more severe, then cauterize that above both eyes.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	 Then cure that until it is healed; and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the form mentioned before.
Capitol .ix.	 Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	 On the Cauterization of the Parazilus and on Softening the Entire Body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	 Cover that you process in softening the head with jars and with the water that has been mentioned; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all the eyes of the head, and with a cautery over the lower part of it, and with three cauteries over the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	 And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body from heat and the patients are tolerant, and the illness is strong, then cauterize that area with four cauteries on the back's vertebrae, and afterwards with a cautery until it is covered with pus, and raise the patient's hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	 And then care for that (area) until it is healed, and this should be cauterized with olive oil.
Capitol .x.	 Chapter 10
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	 Of the Cauterization of Epilepsy
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	 One should not cauterize an epileptic unless the epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	 Therefore, it is necessary to cleanse the brain at its beginning with years and with the other treatment that we have mentioned in the division, when the patient is great and tolerant of the rejection of medications.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	 And if it is a child who cannot tolerate medications, then administer strengthening and chewable mixtures that cleanse, for several days, with the improvement of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	 Then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that (area) with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the aforementioned method, and with another cautery on their occiput, and on each corner of the head, also cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	 And if the patient is strong and enduring, then cauterize them with cauteries as I have described, after having caused paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	 And let it be a cautery with olive oil as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	 But if the patient is a child, then use a fine cautery in this manner.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	 On Cauterizing for Melancholy
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	 When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and thick flame, then cauterize with the cauteries that we have mentioned, in having caused paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	 And if the cause of melancholy is a decline into superfluity, and the patient's body is wet, then give them water that purifies their brain according to what has been said before in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	 And then shave the patient's head, and then make a decently made circle from it, and then place that in the middle of the head. ‌
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	 And let the patient be sitting calmly, and let them be held on all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	 Then place an ointment; and it is more suitable to use old sheep fat.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	 And warm him over a moderate fire, which is said to benefit him when he is most in need of it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	 Then place him in the middle of his head with the circle, and let him be cooled within it until he is chilled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	 And do this with the patient once a week, along with his other treatment, until he is healed; or if you prefer, cauterize him by making small points according to his constitution, but make sure to have a hand with a cautery arranged in such a way: this is the type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	 Then place this cotton ball soaked in wine or in linseed oil.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter XII
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	 On the Cauterization of Water Descending into the Eye.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	 When you have identified the onset of water in the eye according to the signs that I mentioned in the previous division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses his head, and protect him from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	 And have him sit in a bath of warm water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	 And then instruct him to shave his head, and cauterize him with a cautery in the middle of his head; and then cauterize him with two cauteries on both temples if the water is issuing from both eyes, or with one strike if it is issuing from one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	 In this case, you should make incisions with the cautery on all the veins and arteries that are below the collarbone; and the cauteries should be placed at a distance from each other, equal to the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	 And be careful of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see any bleeding from it, stop the blood with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	 And I come with wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in their removal, as well as in the prevention of blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	 And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck under two bones with two very thin cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	 On the Cauterization of Old Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	 When tears from the eyes are old and persistent, and through the veins and arteries that are in the most obvious part of the head outside, it is verified that this is a superfluous phlegmatic humor, then cauterize with the cautery that we mentioned at the beginning of water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries in the neck below two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck below two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	 And if you need an addition, then cauterize that area on the entire back of the neck, near the edge of the eyebrow, with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	 It seems like there might have been a mistake in my previous response. The phrase "Capitol .xiiii." does not follow the pattern of the previous lines and does not seem to fit with the rest of the text. Could you please provide the next line or check if this is indeed part of the medieval medical treatise?
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	 Of the cauterization for a smelly nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	 When you treat that with the water we mentioned in the division and your treatment does not work, then prepare [a mixture] and give the patient the [following ingredients] to drink for three nights; and after that, shave his head, and cauterize him with a cautery of iron and a cautery of olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	 And then cauterize that area with a clove cautery, using two cauteries on both eyebrows near the hairline, but just a little bit.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	 And be careful with the cautery so that you do not burn too deeply.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	 And this is the way to make a clove cautery.
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	 Of the use of a cautery for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery made with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	 And if you, cauterize that above both eyebrows with a small amount of cautery on both sides, in all parts, and they should be elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	 And let the length of each cautery correspond to the width of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	 But do not press too hard with your hand on the cauteries; instead, according to the amount that one-third of the eyelid is burned.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter XVI
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	 Of the cautery on the eye when the hairs are turned inside and the eye is inflamed.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	 When the hairs of the eye are turned inside so that they prick the eye, cauterizing in these cases is done in two ways, because cauterization can be either with fire or with burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	 If by cauterization with fire, command the patient before this to let their hair grow as those who have them shaved until they are prolonged and thinned out; and if that is the case, you must strengthen the eyes of the patient with a bandage so that it does not worsen until the hairs grow back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	 Therefore, when they have grown back and thinned out, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and carefully mark on the eyelid of his eyes with a tent, with a sign that is according to the shape of a holly leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs. ›
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	 And then place a piece of cotton soaked in egg white or in a paste made from flour on the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	 And then prepare the cautery, which has this form:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	 And then cauterize on the figure that you have drawn, little by little, in visible spots, until the surface of the kidney is burnt, which appears like a myrtle leaf, very clearly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	 The sign of the success of this operation is that you see the eyelid of the wound already contracted and the hair on it raised due to the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	 Therefore, raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then place on it cotton with a border until the scar has healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	 But if the hairs return for any reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another cautery on it just as you did at first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	 But if the hairs remain on the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural place and healed, so that the hairs do not touch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence:
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	 Let's translate the provided text line by line:
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	 And place the said [medicine] on the wound and press it gently, do not remove it until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is in them like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	 And so when he perceives that he has felt the bite, then let go of the medicine and wash it with your hand; when the bite ceases, then remove the medicine and rinse the wound with water; and then consider if you see that the eyelid is lifted as it should be after removing the constriction with fire or incision, for then it is well. And if not, return the medicine to the place where it was not applied and do not neglect [it] until your operation is complete and the wound is closed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	 Then place over it a compress with borders until the swelling from the inflammation is removed, and then treat it with an ointment of henbane or another until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	 And it is necessary for you to conduct your operation with careful vigilance so that no residue of the medicine falls into the wound. And if after several days the eyelid is softened and some hairs are protruding from the wound, then repeat your medicine on that part of the eyelid which is softened, exactly as you did at first, and then remove it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 And this is the shape of the myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	 And know that the heels of men are varied according to their size and smallness, and therefore your contraction is made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	 And do not hide the path of righteousness from him who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter XVII
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	 Of cautery for a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	 When you treat a fistula with the water we mentioned in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not work, then you should cauterize it as follows: command the patient to put his head on your lap, and have another person hold the patient's head between their hands so that it is not moved or shaken.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	 Then place a piece of cotton dipped in egg white or honey and flour over the patient's eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And then heat up the cautery, which looks like this:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	 Which should be concave, as is the shape of a reed or a vulture's feather, one end of which is used to make the cautery.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	 And if you want it to be, it should penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	 "And if you want it to be thus as you intend.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	 "But however, the one who is skillful is better suited for this task.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	 "Then immediately press the fistula if it is open, and draw from it the pus and dry it out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	 "And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	 "Then immediately place the cautery on it, which should be well-lit. With that skilled hand, hold a little below the tip of the cautery at the base of the nose, so that your hand does not burn or cause discomfort to the patient. Then place the cautery in the grooves of the nose and apply heat to it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	 "And so if at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, as needed; and leave it like this for three days. Then place a plaster over the spot and surround it with drying ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	 "But if twelve days have passed and it is not healed, then apply over it a caustic medicine until the bone is exposed and scraped according to what is convenient in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	 Based on the pattern and structure of the provided text, here's a line-by-line translation attempt:
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	 And if the fistula is healed with the water we have mentioned from the cautery and treatment, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer an incision of the nose and reduce the fistula back into the body of the nose according to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	 Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	 About the cauterization of the split in the feet.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	 Often such splits occur on the lips, and especially on the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	 Therefore, when you cure these splits with the water we have mentioned in the divisions and your cure does not work, then burn the cautery with a small knife according to this form that follows:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	 And let its concavity be according to the sharpness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	 Then place that carefully in those splits until the cautery reaches the depth of the splits.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	 And then cure it with plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	 About the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 When an abscess forms at the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the root of the teeth, and it begins to fester, and it breaks open, and it heals, but continues to fester and a fistula is formed, and you cure it but the cure does not work, then you should ignite a cautery according to the size that fits in the fistula, and put that ignited [cautery] into the opening of the fistula, and keep your hand there until the hot iron reaches its depth, and do this once or twice; and then cure it with the water we have mentioned for the treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	 And therefore, if the wound is healed and has been healed, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to uncover the area and remove the rotting bones as it will be explained in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	 Chapter XX
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	 About the cauterization of teeth and the softening of veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	 When veins are softened by humidity and teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines but they do not improve, then place the patient's head in your lap, and ignite the cautery of the form which will be shown later, so that you place the spoon over the tooth and quickly insert the heated cautery into it, holding it with your hand a little inside so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	 And then lift up your hand, and then repeat with the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	 And then have the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and keep it there for an hour, and then spit it out, because the decayed tooth is sealed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupt humidity is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter XXI
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	 "On the cautery for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	 "When toothache is due to coldness, or if there is an abscess or worm in the tooth, and you do not administer medicine for the cure, then you should cauterize it according to two methods: either cauterize with a cow's horn, or cauterize with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	 "Cauterize with a horn by taking a cow's horn and filling it with hot iron filings, then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of the horn, next immerse it in hot iron filings and place it on the painful tooth immediately until it becomes numb.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	 "And repeat this process several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	 "And if you prefer, dip wool or cotton in the aforementioned horn [filings], and place it on the painful tooth, then place hot iron on top until the heat reaches the depth of the cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	 "However, the cauterization with fire is that you pay attention to the tip of an awl or needle, and there be some thickness in its core so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	 And then heat the cautery in the shape that will be used, and place it on the tooth until the cautery is heated; do this several times because the pain will be reduced either that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	 It is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good odor from the impression of that cautery and holds it for one hour, and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	 And use the cautery on whichever extremity you wish, according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	 And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	 Of the cauterization of hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	 When hernias are caused by phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to digestion with medicines and you wish to achieve light digestion of those, then heat the cautery as follows: it should have two openings so that smoke can escape from one opening, and place the heated cautery on the swelling once, or twice if needed, until it reaches the core of the swelling.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	 And if the swelling is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and leave it for three days, and then place a cloth soaked in good odor on it until what the fire has burned is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for him with ointments, bandages, and cloths until he is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	 And the shape of the needle or cautery should be thus conveyed.
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	 On the cauterization of a hoarse voice and constriction of breath.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	 When moisture comes over the passage of the lung, and especially when this is with coldness of complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at first with purgative medicines, and afterwards you must cauterize him in the region of the throat in the depressed area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	 And be careful not to go too deep with the cautery into the throat, nor burn more than a little of its length.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	 And then you must cauterize him with another cautery in the joint of the neck at the last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	 The cautery for this should be heated as described before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 Then care for him with the water previously mentioned until he is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 Chapter 24
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	 On the Cauterization of Lung Ailments and Coughing
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	 When coughing and lung ailments are due to cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or tisics, and it is an old ailment, then you should cauterize him with two cauteries on the furcula in the depressed areas, one on each side; and with another cautery in the middle of the sole of the foot between the two mamillos; and the cauteries should be heated as described before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	 And if you wish, let your cauterization be done with the pointed instrument called "punctum," whose shape should precede in the treatment of earache pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 And place points [or: make incisions] into these areas; and then care for it with the water that has been prepared beforehand until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	 And let there be three parts to the cautery, for cauterization is done with this: in one application you can perform three cauteries according to this method:
Capitol .xxv.	 This seems out of place and does not correspond to any part of the previous text. It appears to be a chapter heading or some other type of marker, rather than a sentence in the same style as the previous ones. Is there more context available for this phrase?
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	 On the cauterization of the head of the little finger.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	 When the head of the little finger is dislocated due to excessive moisture and does not return to its proper place within the hour, you should wait for the dislocation until it customarily returns, and then with a small movement, it will return to its place, as we have shown. Therefore, it is necessary that you first reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient onto their stomach or side; and then lift the heel of the hand that is on the inside of the little finger towards the outside parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated on the inside parts.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And then ignite the cautery which has two ends; this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	 And then cauterize the cord until it penetrates through to the other side; and the figure of cautery will then have four ends.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And thus, the subtlety is according to the number of attempts; this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	 And sometimes it fits according to this method, and because there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	 And then place powdered salt on the cautery, and then have the patient hold still, so that the limb is not moved at all for any time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	 And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it is done later, then cauterize on the muscle with a clavicle cautery or with several pointed cauteries, because the joint is strengthened and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	 On the Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	 When cold and excessive moisture enters the stomach until it causes vomiting, and if you continue the treatment methods without improvement, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back with their hands and legs extended, and then cauterize them with three cauteries: one cautery below the feet with a quantity of a finger's length using a clavicle cautery, and two cauteries below each side of the first cautery, so that the figure of the cautery becomes triangular; and the ones that are not well placed will cause blistering.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	 And if the depth of the cautery equals two-thirds of the thickness of the cord.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	 And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	 And let the stomach be punctured at the point that is indicated by this cautery: and it is such that you know on the stomach [the points] according to the amount that you wish, with a tentative touch, and then cauterize those [points] with the cautery; and then treat those [points] with the treatment that has been described until they are healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	 On the Cauterization of a Fractured Foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	 When there is pain in the foot due to cold, humidity, or excessive flatulence, until its normal function is restored by the removal of excess fluid, and the patient is cured with the water we have mentioned and without food, then it is necessary for the patient to be placed on their back, and examine with a tentative touch three cauteries according to this form and this quantity, placing them on the foot below the hypochondrium, which is the man's lying position.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	 And let there be a space between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be placed along the length of the body correctly.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	 And do not press too hard with the cauteries.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	 And if the amount of water that has been heated is equal to half the length of a codfish, and it is not hot enough; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not, then they should be sitting, with their limbs extended and their arms raised.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	 And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	 And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a surgical knife, when it is with your skill and wisdom in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	 And be careful not to process too much in the cauterization, and let the length of the entire codfish be heated so that the whole body is heated and reaches into the intestines, for the codfish here is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	 Of the perforation of a pustule in the foot with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	 When you wish to open or perforate a pustule in the foot and want to know if that pustule is in the flesh of the foot or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will experience heaviness and pain without acuity.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	 And if it is in the lung's pleura, with the pain being very sharp and often tiring doctors from caring for it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	 Therefore, it is necessary that the patient be placed on their side; then mark the location of the abscess with a sign; and then heat up the cautery which resembles a needle, whose shape has been shown on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	 And cauterize with that [cautery] until the entire cord is burnt away, until it reaches the center, until pus comes out.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	 Then treat this in the same way as for other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	 And it is not necessary to use this type of cautery except for the one about which medical studies have been prolonged, and with which most patients have become familiar; however, this has been attempted on some occasions for this operation, but nevertheless, leave that to us, and it will be better.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter 29
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	 On the Cauterization of Plague.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	 The ancients said that the cautery for plague sores should be made in this manner: Take a long, dry reed from the wild rose bushes, which is pointed and as thick as a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	 Certainly! Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text into English:
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	 And it is not necessary for you to cover your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be visible at the end of the handle.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	 And some ancient people said that there are some men who use a cautery of iron similar to ray and ignite it in the place which is between the ribs, until they reach with it an abscess and the pus is evacuated, as we have said in the case of foot abscess.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	 However, in this perforation with a cautery, there is danger, for one could die immediately if it happens in the place of a fistula that does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	 Chapter .30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	 On the cauterization of the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	 When you cure the disease of the spleen with what has been said about the treatment in the division and do not achieve a cure, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are correct, one of which is that you make three or four cauteries along the length of the spleen according to the figure of the foot's cauteries, whose figure precedes.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	 And the space between each cautery should be as thick as a finger or a little more, and the manner of making the cautery should be the same manner as has been said for the foot's cauteries equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	 "And do not press your hand with the cautery; let the patient be face down on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	 "And there is another way to cauterize, which involves heating the cautery with two openings, as mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lifting the chain that is at the level of the spleen, so that it touches the left side of the patient's body.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	 "And let your elevation with which you lift the chain be according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries are made according to the breadth of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	 "And now insert the two openings, heated very much, into that opening through which you will pass the chain from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	 "And then remove the cautery; thus four cauteries have been made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	 "And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three openings.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	 "And then take care of the cautery after it has finished dripping for too many days, because it is more comfortable than the other preceding causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter 31
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	 "On Cauterizing Dropsy
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	 "Do not perform cauteries on patients with dropsy, but rather on the bladder specifically.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	 When you treat a person with dropsy using the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the section and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary to use four cauteries around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another on the ribs, another on the spleen, two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, one cautery on the right foot, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	 And let the depth of the cauterization be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	 And then leave the cauterized wound open so that it may discharge for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	 And do not evacuate the patient of treatment immediately after the cauterization with water as it should be given to them in two doses, and then quickly feed them with healing aids.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	 The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be pointed, as its form has been mentioned above, and that with which the back is cauterized should be oval, as its form has been mentioned previously.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter 32
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	 On the Cauterization of Feet and Hips.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	 When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with serous fluid, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in the place that is between the ankle and the fourth toe, and raise your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then raise your hand, and do not lower it completely, because the serous fluid will drain.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	 It seems like you've provided a sentence in an old Romance language, possibly Occitan or Catalan, based on the context of medieval medical treatises. Let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line into English:
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	 And let the cauteries be according to the length of the cushion, placing one at the top and another in the middle of the cushion; and on each cushion two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	 And leave the wound open without dressing for a long time so that any water can drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	 And treat him with these remedies that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter 33
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	 On the Cauterization of the Abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	 When the abdomen is afflicted by cold and moisture to the point of weakening the vital forces—which are the digestive and retentive faculties located in the stomach and intestines—it is treated with various methods of healing and not with purgatives. Sometimes, patients endure cautery that reveals the vital force; in such cases, treat them with a large cautery on their stomach according to what has been said about the cauterization of the stomach, using circular cauteries and four subtle cauteries around the navel, as well as a subtle claw-shaped cautery, and one or two cauteries on the abdomen.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	 And if the abdomen is afflicted by excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then treat them with a cautery on the penis and testicles, and place two cauteries on the stomach near the groin, because this treatment is perfectly curative and does not cause error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 Chapter 34
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	 Of the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	 When old hemorrhoids are caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture in nature and they have been treated with water as mentioned earlier, but the cure is not effective, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus under the small of the back with a small triangular cautery. Also, place a cautery above the navel through two times.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	 And if you suspect that the patient's stomach is cold and their food is undigested, and their face is pale, then cauterize with a large cautery on the stomach as previously described; and with one cautery on the navel, and another cautery on the spleen with a pointed cautery. Leave the cauteries open for some time, and then care for them until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter 35
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	 Of the cauterization of a tumor near its incision.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	 When you cut a tumor, then heat the cautery that is similar to a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	 Then place that heated cautery in the incised tumor and continue your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And do this once or twice, because if the pustules are too many, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and then treat them with water mixed with ointments until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	 And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any part of the body, it is more dangerous for healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	 About cauterizing fistulas that occur naturally in the divisions of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	 When nature does not respond to the work we have described in its place, and the patient is disturbed by this, let him be healed with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	 Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the natural body part that is old, it bleeds and has corrupt humidity. And therefore, what is most worthy to do is to explore that with a subtle probe, and then you will know the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	 Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	 And then place that heated cautery on this fistula, according to the quantity in which you have inserted the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 And repeat the cautery on that part until the corrupt flesh is burned once or twice or three times, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	 And beware of the burning of nerves and veins; or if there is a fistula going into the body of the bladder or into the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you believe it will not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 And then heal the area so that it may heal.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	 And if the place is sealed and all the matter has been cut away from it and it remains like this for a long time, then know that it has been completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	 And if the matter is not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in its bones, or this comes from those causes of which there will be a memory in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	 Of the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	 When hemorrhoids cause pain due to cold or excessive flatulence, and as a result the patient's skin is dried out, then it is necessary to cauterize them with a cautery on each hemorrhoid with a pointed iron of which we have spoken before.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	 And perform the cautery strongly with the second one a little after, so that three lines of cauterization will come, and thus they will be more durable in help.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Based on the pattern of the provided text, it appears that each section is labeled with a Roman numeral indicating its chapter or section number. Here's how you can approach translating this:
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	 "On the Cauterization of the Bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	 "When there is debility and softening in the bladder due to cold and moisture to such an extent that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it on the lower part of the bladder, below where the pubic hairs begin, using a pointed cautery on the right side and another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	 "The length of each cautery should be according to the size of the patient's navel; and cauterize it with a pointed cautery in the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	 "And let the cautery be pointed according to the process.
Capitol .xxxix.	 "Chapter 39
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	 "On the Cauterization of the Womb.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	 "When cold and moisture occur in the womb, preventing conception, corrupting its menses, delaying their onset, and causing pain during menstruation, then the area should be cauterized with three pointed cauteries around the navel, as we have said for the bladder; and with a pointed cautery below the back, or with two cauteries.
Capitol .xl.	 "Capitol XL" translates to "Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	 "On the Cauterization of Ankle Dislocation.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	 "When moist humors are infused in the area of the ankle and have caused it to move from its place, a sign of this is that one part of the joint protrudes over the other when compared.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	 "And the location of the dislocation is found in the swollen area.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	 "Therefore, you should cauterize the patient on the affected area of their ankle with a circular-shaped cautery. Before doing this, you will test the area by rotating a probe around it to ensure that the affected part is in the center of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	 "And let the shape of the cautery used be similar to that used for stomach cauterization.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	 "And if this type of cautery is not available, then use three cauteries with large olive-shaped heads.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "And let the cautery be performed according to the size of the swelling in all the joints; and afterwards, care for that part until it heals.
Capitol .xli.	 "Chapter XLI
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	 "On the Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	 "When there is pain in the ankle area and it is caused by cold and moistness, treat the patient with the remedies we have mentioned earlier, but if they are not effective or become old-fashioned, then you should remove the gross humors from the patient using foul-smelling pills or artificial pills. Afterwards, cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	 The manner of the cautery in this case is according to two manners: cautery with burning medicines or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	 According to two known methods, one of which is to cauterize that area at the base of the ankle with three triangular cauteries in this manner; and do so with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	 And let the space between each cautery be the width of a finger, whether it is an olive-sized or large cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	 However, sometimes the cauteries should be placed in the middle of the ankle, as there are four cauteries in total.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	 And if you wish, cauterize with the circle that precedes the form for the cauterization of ankle dislocation, which is a continuous circle and burns the tip of the entire tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	 And this is the manner of cauterization for gout when the pain adheres to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	 However, if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh in the place where you direct the patient's pain, which is the dolor; and with one cautery on the knee four fingers above the lateral side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	 And if you are using a surgical knife for the cautery, ensure that the depth of the cautery corresponds to the thickness of the ligament.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	 And if the patient indicates that the pain has spread to other parts of the body, then cauterize those areas as well, using three or four points, or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	 And if the patient indicates that there is pain beneath the navel towards the thigh, then cauterize that area with a surgical knife.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	 And be careful in all cauterizations that you do not go too deep with the cautery to avoid burning nerves or large blood vessels, as this could cause harm or contraction in the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	 And I have seen one or two cases where the person who performed the cautery went too deep and the leg became inflamed until the tumor reached the foot, which then became gangrenous and rotted entirely.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	 And this can lead to a severe case of intestinal perforation, and even death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	 And if the pain is in two places at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	 And the wise have said that in the cautery of water, one should use a cautery similar to this: make it like an iron ring whose circumference is half the size of a palm; and its orifices should be according to the thickness of a datil bone or less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And within that circle should be another third; and the space that is between them should be the width of the thumb; and these circles should be open on two sides; and the length of those chains should be one night or two nights, and make in those margins decent ironwork adorned on the circles; and this is its form:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	 Then it should be heated in the fire until it glows and emits sparks, and then place it on the open wound of the patient while they lie on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	 And therefore cauterize that with three round cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then leave it for three days; then bandage that with cloth and let the wound remain open for several days; and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	 Says Al-Zahrawi: Oh, sons, we have used this type of cautery little because of the fear of its aftercare and because few are those who care for it afterwards.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	 But from the good cauteries comes benefit to those who endure them and find relief with them.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	 But cauteries with adherent medicines are that you make two circles having a perforated ring in which they put the handle of an iron door; let the length of the walls in their height be two nights or even those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	 And if the space which is between each quantity of the thickness of the said [finger/toe]; and they are opened below and above, and they should contain themselves between them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	 And immediately place the patient lying on his side, and press your hand on the part of the ankle; then take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and heat that little by little with fire, and keep that for the duration of one hour, and suffer the patient the biting and the adjustment of him — for this remedy bites as if from fire — until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	 And immediately lift your hand with the instrument and wash away all the hot water from the entire ankle with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	 And leave it alone for three days and place on that border until the blackness of the adjustment has disappeared, and leave it like this for several days, and then there will be a peeling from him; this is last in help.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And immediately care for that with ointments until he is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	 And if the pain extends into the thigh or leg, make for him a statue that contains water according to what is done with the ankle in the same way.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	 And this is the manner of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	 Recipe of lye and chalk, both not fully extinguished, one part of each, mix them and place in a new tile, through which the upper part is perforated by a small hole, according to the amount that enters the beam.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	 And place beneath the tile another inverted tile, and pour over that lye and chalk live water, two fingers' width, and after you have compressed them well with your hand, let the sharp water descend from above into the lower part of the inverted tile.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	 And then adjust all that water and pour it over more live chalk and renewed lye, because at this point it will have a very strong acidity, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, because it acts like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	 And thus some of the medicines with which one is cauterized, such as terebinth and honey anacard and chalk with soap, should be mixed in this way.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	 And Gualia recounts of a man from ancient times the operation and cure by which pain of the ankle and sciatica is healed, and she says that nothing else is needed for this cure, and it works once as she recounts, because afterwards that person enters a bath and immediately comes out healed.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	 And it should be taken from green nettle, and if green is not found, then take a recent fig; and it should be crushed with a little gray [salt], and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the leg, and bound.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	 And it should be left for a period of three hours or for as long as the patient feels relief from the pain.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	 And then put that person in a bath, and when their body is reddened, let them step onto the ground, for the pain will cease and they will be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	 And know that no one should use cautery with these medicines except to evacuate the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	 But Escorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with the cut of a goat, it benefits more; and cautery should be used in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the soles.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	 And then take a piece of dry goatskin and set it on fire until it becomes charcoal; then place it on the wool and remove any impurities so that it is pure.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	 And then repeat this process, and do not stop doing so until the feeling of biting reaches the water, relieving the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	 And this method of cauterization is called "cautery with cups.
Capitol .xlii.	 Chapter XLII
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	 On the cauterization for back pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	 Sometimes pain occurs in the back due to various reasons, such as falling or blows, or excessive discharge of fluids, and similar causes, through the infusion of cold, damp material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	 Cauterization is only effective in this particular type, which is caused by an infusion of cold material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	 Therefore, it is necessary to first evacuate the patient with purging pills and similar remedies, which should be made on the back where the pain is located, in three lines according to its width. And after ten days on each line, cauterize or make as many incisions as needed, depending on the patient's tolerance and the strength of the medicine.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	 And a pointed cautery should be used for the cauterization.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	 And if you wish, cauterize with three or four mid-line nail-shaped cauteries in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	 Chapter 43
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	 On Cautery at the Onset of Jaundice
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	 This illness is often found in small children; and the first sign of its onset in children is that they experience a swelling and movement over their limbs, especially in the joints of their hips.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	 And you will find that it starts to appear on the last vertebrae of the back and in the buttocks, which begin to protrude over the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	 Therefore, when you see this and want to prevent it from spreading, immediately cauterize the affected area with a circular cautery as shown here:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	 so that the cautery covers all parts of the vertebrae equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	 And if you wish, you may also cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	 And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	 Then care for the area until it is healed as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	 But be careful not to administer cautery in cases of jaundice caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	 Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	 On Cauterization for Gout and Joint Pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	 And therefore, when gout caused by coldness is treated and the pain is not reduced, then proceed with cauterization.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	 You should cauterize in that area around the joint of the foot using several cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And this is how it looks:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	 If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	 And if the pain moves into the toes or other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauteries on all sides using this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	 And if you need more cauteries than these, then cauterize accordingly, but do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand; only around the size of a bean.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	 And if the pain moves into the big toe and the second toe, then administer the cautery as we said in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	 "And if the pains are only in the hands and it is called suagra, then prick around the fingernails as they revolve, pricking in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	 "And if the pains remain in the said places, then prick around each nail and on the tip of the finger.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	 "And if the pains approach the shoulders or arms after several days, then cauterize each part of the entire arm.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	 "And do not evacuate the patient with good regulation and reception of medications, because if a good regulation is made and the inflammation is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healed, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	 "Chapter XLV
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	 "On the Cauterization of Fractures
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	 "When there is a fracture in the shins, and the intestines protrude before the bladder into the genital area, and this begins to happen, it is necessary that you tell the patient to stop eating on that day and to use lenient causes so that the opening of their stomach.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	 "And follow the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to hold their breath until the stone is thrown out or the bladder or intestines appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	 And then return that one with the said words and signals, attempting to cause a break on the bones of the patella with a sign indicating the extremity of which is similar to half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And then ignite the cautery, the form of which is this:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	 until it becomes very red and gives off sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	 Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	 And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, and another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	 And then place the cautery on that sign with your hand holding the cautery straight, and press until you reach the bones of the patella halfway between the thighs; and repeat this action once more if you have not reached the bone in the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	 And carefully observe the protrusion of the intestine during your cauterization, lest you burn that intestine and cause death or other great harm to come upon the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	 And know that when you use the cautery, do not touch the bones, lest you harm your work.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	 And it is fitting that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	 And then care for the cauterized area for three days with bandages until the scar of the fire is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for that [person] with other ointments until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	 And let the patient lie on their back for forty days, until the place and the wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	 And it is fitting that you regulate the patient's food according to the length of time of their cure, which will prevent their belly from bursting and the intestines from coming out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	 And then when [the patient] wants to get up after about forty days, administer a properly made poultice, and let [him/her] have it for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	 And let [him/her] be restrained from work and excessive eating and drinking, and from loud voices, for when [he/she] uses this complete regimen of healing, [he/she] will surely be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	 And I will speak of the cure for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and so at first, if you do not want them to stop, then cauterize that rupture with a round cautery according to its size; and let what is exhaled from the intestines be as well as the third part [of it]; and then care for [the patient] with what we have said, and it will not burst.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	 "And some said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, as it is indicated by touch.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	 "And a line is placed that runs along the length of the wound above the rupture, and another line above it; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	 "Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	 "On the Cauterization of Hernia
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	 "When pain persists in certain members due to injury or impact and this pain lasts for a long time and is not relieved by medicine, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	 "And the size of the cautery should be appropriate for each member according to its magnitude and smallness, and strength and weakness of it, and the location of the hernia and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	 "Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for it is customary for those pains to be transferred from one member to another nearby, so it is necessary to catch them with a cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	 Capitulum .xlvii.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	 De Cauterizatione Leprosae.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	 Some lepers are treated with cautery for great benefit, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of black bile and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	 Therefore, when you want to cauterize this person, consider if the leprosy is common and whether it has been treated with the water we mentioned in the division, and neither let them say nor do this, lest the corruption spread throughout their body and affect all of its parts; then cauterize that person on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and another below it, towards the forehead to the hairline; and both on two temples; and one at the back, either on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	 And complete your work with the cauteries a little deeper, pressing into the bone slightly, and from this displacement let the scabs be removed, so that the exhalation of gross vapors may be relieved from him; and cauterize on the spleen as necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	 And if the leprosy has already spread across the patient and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize him with those cauteries which we have mentioned on the head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both cheeks, and with two cauteries on the two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the buttocks, and one on the buttock, and with two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and with two on the soles and one on each sole, and with two on the elbows, and with two on the shoulders, and with two on the tendons of their feet; and cauterize him on all the joints of the fingers of the hands and the feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the pads of his palms.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	 And beware of the nerves that are on the heel, lest you burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	 And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the thigh.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	 And know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as they do with their hands, because their body is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	 And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints, as has been said above in the chapter on tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for the cautery with wheat flour mixed with honey and with the other remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	 Chapter 48
De cauterizacio de stupor.	 On the Cauterization of Stupor
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	 When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb member with a cautery according to the size of the member, whether large or small.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	 And let your cautery enter the spine a little bit.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then care for that [area] with an ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	 And sometimes cautery is applied to certain numbness that should be in the hands and feet, as well as the spine of the back, where the nerves controlling that member are located, and the numbness is removed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	 But do not attempt this unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the course of the nerves moving throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	 Chapter XLIX
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	 On the Cautery of Morphea
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	 When the morphea is old and you do not cure it with any of the medicinal ointments, then you cauterize it with a cautery for a short while, according to the size of the thread-like appearance, until its whiteness and color are removed and its color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	 Then cure it with a mixture of barley flour and lentils, with rose oil and mullein leaves, and with pigeon blood or swallow blood, each being one part, and all mixed together. Then take a cloth and place it on the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	 Chapter LI
De cauterizacio de cranc.	 On the Cautery of Cancer
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	 When cancer begins and you wish to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as if it were turning.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	 And the wise men said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle part; but I have not seen this, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and indeed I have seen this happen on several occasions.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	 And it is more appropriate that it be cauterized around it with a circular pattern as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Capitol .li.	 Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	 On the Cauterization of Hernias.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	 When some hernias are delayed in maturing, and this is due to the excessiveness of that [hernia] or the state of the patient, who is old and weak-bodied, with little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the hernia; then cauterize around it with many small cauteries; and thus leave it, for it will hasten in maturing. 》
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	 But if you want to perforate it with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose form is like this [demonstrated above], and place that in the middle of the hernia until it penetrates the intestine.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you put the cautery in that place which is lower, so that the body of the arm may be relieved; and then cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	 This appears to be a chapter heading or title, similar to "Chapter 52" in modern texts. A direct translation would simply be:
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	 Of the cauterization of a malignant wound.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	 Corrodent is corruption walking in the member, which corrupts it as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	 Therefore, if you see that corruption in the place where it should be cauterized with fire, then you burn cautery nails very few and large, according to what is suitable for that place where it is corrupting.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	 And then cauterize it from all sides until you have completely eradicated all corruption and nothing of it remains.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	 And then let it rest for three days, and place over the cauterized places a poultice made of oil mixed with herbs until all scabs have been completely removed and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	 And then treat it with flesh-generating ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	 But if after three days you see that the flesh has grown healthy where there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery in those places where it was corrupt.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	 And a malignant wound is treated sometimes with sharp medicine, because that is similar to cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	 However, cauterization by fire is more beneficial for the discharge of pus.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	 "And I have already said the treatment for him with sharp medicine in the division, so take that when you will see his illness.
Capitol .liii.	 Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	 Of Cautery for Wounds and Other Similar Conditions
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	 Many times it is seen in the parts below the sick foot that are called wound, and they are large, deep, which affect the foot; and cautery in these is done in two ways: by fire cautery and by hot water cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	 However, fire cautery is performed by igniting the cautery in the shape of a vulture's quill, which should be made of iron according to the size that encompasses the entire wound on all sides, and it should have fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	 Then place that lit cautery on the wound and then turn your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the wound until the cautery reaches the depth of the wound.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	 And leave it there for three days until it begins to throw out pus.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	 And then plaster it with crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the plaster on it for one night, because that will have uprooted its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat the area with an ointment made from the meat of a male goat until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	 And if it is not healed and similar incidents occur on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer cautery with water. Take a small tube made of copper, iron, or a vulture's quill, and place it over the nail; then pour into the tube a small amount of hot water, hold your hand firmly on the tube, and rotate it vigorously with your hand. Press the edges of the tube against the surface of the nail, so that the hot water finds its way to the root of the nail. Wait for the patient to feel the heat of the water for an hour, then remove it, because the nail with its roots will be corrected.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	 Do this to all such [afflictions] until you have treated every one of them that is on the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	 Then treat those ulcers whose roots have been eradicated by the water of those ointments which cause flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	 Chapter III
De cauterizacio de tremor.	 On Cautery for Tremors
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	 When some tremor occurs due to a chill in the nerves or due to fever of cold cause, or for any similar reason, then you should cauterize that person with four cauteries or five on the spine's vertebrae, one between each vertebra; and with cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, with olive oil cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	 And the person's tremor will subside, hastening the health of the cold-caused illness.
Capitol .lv.	 Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	 On cauterizing various incidents in the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	 When the body is afflicted with various ulcers and pustules, which are made from gross, corrupt materials; then it is necessary at the beginning of their appearance that they be cauterized on the head of each fistula with a subtle cautery with a myrtle stick, the tip of which is extended with fire; or with a long razor; or with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	 And sometimes these are cauterized in the same way at the beginning of their expulsion; and they do not become worse, and the excess causing them is dispersed, and they heal from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	 However, it is necessary that this be done after proper evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	 It looks like you've provided only a chapter number in Latin ("Capitol lvi."), which translates to "Chapter 56" in English. Since this is not a full sentence, I need more text to provide a line-by-line translation into English. Please provide the next sentence or paragraph for a more complete translation.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the provided text:
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	 Certainly! Let's break down the sentence and translate it into English:
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	 When it happens to someone, then you should immediately grasp the wound with your hand at the opening of the artery, and press firmly on it until the flow of blood ceases under your finger, and it does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	 Then heat the olive-based cauteries, both small and large, in the fire by the count of nine, and blow on them until they are very hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	 Then take one of these, either small or large, depending on the location and wound where the artery has been ruptured. Quickly place it on that vein after you have removed your finger, and apply the cautery until the blood is sealed and constricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	 And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another cautery immediately from those prepared in the fire, and continue doing this with one after another until the blood is constricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	 And be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, lest it bring upon the patient another ailment.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	 And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to constrict the blood in those cases, especially if the artery is large, except by one of four methods: either by cautery as we have said before, or by extraction when it has not been extracted; for when it is extracted, its extremities are better burned and the blood is constricted. Or it can be ligated with thread or a bandage with great force, or medicines whose property is to constrict the blood may be placed on it; and they should be strengthened with a cushion and proper constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	 Certainly! Let's break down the sentence and translate it step by step:
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	 This text appears to be discussing a medical procedure for treating a wound or an injury related to a blood vessel (vein). Here's a line-by-line translation:
Comensa la segonda partida.	 Start the second section.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	 Of incision, perforation, and venesection, and of phlebotomy, and of wounds, and their likenesses.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	 These are the words of Al-Zahrawi (Abulcasis).
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	 In the first chapter, we have mentioned all illnesses in which it is appropriate to use a heated cautery or combustible medicine, as well as their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for this purpose with the shapes of the cauteries; and I have arranged the chapters on the superiority of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	 And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the seeker may be comforted regarding what he has asked about.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	 And before I begin this, it is necessary for you to learn, my son, that in this chapter there is something similar to what is in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	 And because it is necessary to exercise great caution in this, for the operations that are frequently performed in this chapter involve the evacuation of blood, with which life is connected. You must be careful not to cut or puncture a vein, incise over an abscess, open an exit wound, clean a wound, extract an arrow, or remove a stone and similar things. xspace
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	 Based on the pattern of the previous translations, here's my attempt at translating this sentence:
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	 And I warn you that nothing should fall on you in which there is hesitation, because sometimes it may happen that you handle men with many diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	 And there are some who will depart with their illness, and it will be easy for them to die, and this is due to the severity of what they find in their illness, and due to the length of their illness, and death is feared because of which it signifies.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	 And among them is he who gives you his property and goods, and you expect to have health with him; but his illness is harmful (to your health).
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	 Therefore, it is not fitting for you to consent to the one who comes to you in this manner; and let your caution be greater than greed, and do not presume any reason except certain knowledge which confirms what is suitable for you, and with whom a praiseworthy succession occurs.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	 And use in the care of all your sick the prognosis and indication for him who has health turned into salvation, because in that is your help towards gaining fame and memory, praise, and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	 Oh, sons, may God inspire you with His understanding and not take away direction and protection from you, for that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Capitol primier.	 Capítulo primero.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	 De la curación del agua que está contenida en la cabeza de los niños.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	 Sabes que esta enfermedad se produce a menudo en los niños recién nacidos y cuando la nodriza aprieta demasiado la cabeza del niño sin consideración.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	 Y en algunos casos ocurre por una razón oculta que no se conoce.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	 Pero yo nunca he visto esta enfermedad en personas mayores; y todos los que he visto han muerto debido a esto, y así se ve un trabajo desagradable en ellos.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	 Y he visto un niño cuya cabeza estaba llena de agua, y su cabeza siempre estaba así magnificada hasta que no podía levantarse sobre sí mismo debido al tamaño de su cabeza, y más que la humedad aumentaba hasta que murió.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	 Y esta humedad se acumula entre los huesos y las membranas, o se acumula debajo de los huesos en el cráneo.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	 Porque si la operación se realiza cuando la humedad está entre las membranas y los huesos y el absceso es pequeño, entonces debes cortar en el medio de la cabeza con una incisión vertical, y la longitud de la incisión debe ser de dos dedos de ancho hasta que drene toda la humedad. Y esta es la forma del espátula: 🤔
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 And so if the humidity is greatly increased and the abscess is large, then there are two incisions in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	 And if the humidity is below the bone, the sign of this is that you see the commissures of the head open on all sides and water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand from within, and this is not hidden to you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 You should cut into the middle of the head with three incisions in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	 And then extract all the humidity through the incision; and then strengthen the incisions with cloths and compresses; and then dress it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day, and then remove the bandage and treat the wound with tenths and ointments, and bind the head tightly; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the limb is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	 And there is another manner of incision, which you consider based on the size of the abscess and the accumulation of water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or in the right side, or in the left; and therefore pay attention with the incision where the abscess and the collection of water appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	 And observe that you do not cut the artery, lest blood flow out and the patient die from that bleeding with a loss of fluids.
Capitol .ii.	 Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	 About the incision of the arteries that are near the ears, which are called "hilasseysse".
Capitol segon.	 Chapter Second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	 When some cataracts or bruises occur in the eyes or feet, and this is old and does not respond to medical treatment, then the last resort for this is the incision of these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	 Therefore, when you want to incise these (arteries), have the patient raise his head, and then rub the area with rough cloth so that the arteries become apparent. Then tightly tie the patient's neck with some cloth; and then feel for the pulse; and press on the places where each of these is near the ears, and they will be hidden in some people (i.e., the arteries may not be visible or easily accessible).
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	 Then mark the artery with a probe, and then incise each one with the sharp tip of the scalpel, penetrating into the bone, and this should be done along the length of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	 And if you wish, insert the spatula below the artery and break it through the skin at the affected area.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	 And let the length of the incision be two fingerbreadths, because when a vein is cut, blood will flow out with a throbbing exit, which jumps out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	 However, if the artery does not appear immediately, then you should measure from the ear the space of three fingers, and then probe with a sound, and find the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	 And the amount of blood to be released is one-sixth of a pint, and do not take too much from him, whether more or less, and all this depends on the strength of the patient and the fullness of his artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 And then consider the wound, and thus if there is any cause of infection remaining on the bone, then cut it out so that an abscess does not form.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then strengthen the wound with compresses and bandages of linen cloth, and then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	 Chapter III
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	 Of the removal of the temples' arteries.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	 When someone suffers from an old migraine or severe headache due to humid humors and the quality of the temples' tendons, or has a violent and similar swelling, and it is not helped by medical treatments, then we resort to these illnesses with the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or the cauterization of those, as we have shown.  (Note: The phrase "humid humors" and other references to ancient medical theories reflect the medieval context of the text.)
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	 And the manner of this operation and extraction is that the patient shaves the hair that is on their temples; and observe the prominent artery in the temple, for it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden except in a few people due to the intensity of cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	 And if it is hidden from you, then tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or pour hot water over the area until the artery becomes clearly visible to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And then take the spatula, which has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	 And then you easily scrape the vein with it until you reach the artery; and then pour medicine into it and extract it from its highest parts until you remove it from the vein and expose it from all the tissues that were covering it.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	 But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the tip of the oncii (small knife or scalpel), and then cut off a piece of it according to the length by which its ends are extended and contracted, so that there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not cut, the blood will not rise completely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	 And approximately evacuate one to three cups of blood.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	 And if the wound is large, then it is necessary for you to bind it in two places with strong double-plied silk or with long cords, and do not allow it to become infected before the wound heals and prevent bleeding.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	 Then immediately cut away the excess flesh that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or about another hour later.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	 And if you wish, cauterize it with a pointed cautery into the bone with a scalpel until the edges of the wound are burned off, and this will serve as that same operation.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	 And it is a better procedure if the patient has a fever or inflammation of the skin; because cautery helps to dry out moisture and therefore it is better in this case.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	 And it is also appropriate to clean the wounds by applying cotton on top of them, and decent bandages should be placed over them, and then they should be treated with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and with poultices until they are healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 And if during the operation you notice further bleeding from the wound, then quickly apply pressure to stop the bleeding, either with a cautery, or by filling the wound with cotton, and keep pressure until the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	 And if none of those reasons are present, then place your finger on the wound until the blood clots, and pour cold water over the area until the pain subsides, and it should be bandaged as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	 And what is lighter in the extraction of arrows is that you should cauterize the vein with this cautery, which has two blades, after having marked both places with a probe, and carefully place each one, very hot, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that what is between its ends is elongated, because it is not solidified in its entirety by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	 And here is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	 And let the sharpness of the two blades be equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	 However, if the sharpness is less than that of two blades, it is better because if they are too sharp like two blades, one will cut the flesh more quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	 Therefore, as these are somewhat thicker, they retain the heat of the fire and cut the flesh more gently.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	 And this work is better for all works and lighter.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	 Based on the context and similarities to Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation attempt of the given sentence:
Capitol quart.	 Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	 On the care of the body for acute and sharp pains in the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	 When the tears are sharp and it is the body of those veins that are on top of the head outside, do not use any cause for the care of medicine in this, and sometimes the face of the patient turns red and they feel a sensation of ants crawling on their forehead, and the eyes of such people become exhausted and wet to the point that their hairs are bent down, and the eyelids are cut by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient healers used this operation for the care of these, and they named that care with a sponge.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	 You should order the patient to shave the hairs on their forehead, and then cut three equally spaced incisions into the forehead according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	 And if the length of the cut is two digits: let one cut be equally distant from the tip of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the small movement of the little fingers that are in the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	 Be careful with the starting point of the arteries that are on both sides and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	 And if each incision is spaced apart by three times the width of a finger.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	 And if you have a sponge or very dry cloth, use it to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	 And then insert a spatula with two sharp ends, and this is how the incision should look like for it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	 which extends from the temples down to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	 Remove with it the entire membrane that is between two incisions on top of the bone, and then do this from the middle incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	 And then insert this spatula into the first incision once more, and then introduce another instrument called a lancet, which is sharp on one end and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	 And place the sharp end against the flesh attached to the membrane, and the other end against the bone, and use it to reach the midline fissure, and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	 But continue the incision until it appears through the membrane, and then do this in the midline fissure to the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	 And because there is a quantity of blood flowing, press the areas where the cold blood gathers.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	 And then place in each small crack some old cloth and place over those lumps covered with wine and oil and vinegar, ensuring that an abscess does not form.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	 And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of hot water or warm tea, and then treat it with an ointment made of basilicum oil and rose oil until the wounds are healed. ✓
Capitol .v.	 Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	 Of the treatment of catarrh and the sores that descend from the inner parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	 When someone has an acute and persistent catarrh, and sometimes the sores of the patient are small and worn out, and their appearance is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and their hairs fall out, and there is a sharp pain in the front of the head accompanied by consequent wasting away, then you should know from these symptoms that the catarrh comes only from the small veins of the inner parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	 And the best treatment for this is as follows: order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in it, at the middle of the forehead, a small one by size (and begin with the left temple incision towards the right temple; and let the incision be into the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples' skin which is bad because of chewing), until the bone is exposed. ✓
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	 "Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill between the two lips of the wound with old cloth or clean rags.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 "Then tightly bind it above with powder mixed in wine and oil, so that it does not become an abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	 "And when you loosen this and see that the abscess has diminished, it is then necessary to rub the bone so that flesh begins to grow on it, and then cure it with a drying regimen that makes the flesh come forth, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, mix them together, and make a plaster from this mixture and apply it to these wounds for the generation of new flesh.
Capitol .vi.	 "Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	 "On the treatment of what falls into the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	 "Everything that falls into the ears is of one of four kinds: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone, such as iron and glass, or it comes from a plant, such as a seed or a bean; or it is something fluid, like water or sour wine, or any creature.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	 "And therefore, when a stone falls into the ear or something similar to those things that do not fit or grow in the ear, and you place the ear in the sun, and if you see the stone, then drip some oil of violets or cumin on it, and then administer the extraction from it. Make the person sneeze by irritating them, and cover their nostrils so that the sneezing will expel it.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	 Based on the context and the similarity to Romance languages, here's a possible translation of the sentence:
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if it has not yet been achieved, then administer an extraction with the instrument called "subtle gesticulator" of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	 And if it was successfully extracted with a gesture, then it is good; and if not, then administer an extraction to the patient with a fine, double-edged lancet.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	 And therefore, if it has not been successfully extracted in this manner, then make a tube of iron and insert the end of the tube into the opening of the ear, and close around the tube with wax and softened oil, so that nothing is open except for the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	 Then extract it with your own breath using strong suction, because many times we have seen this method work.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	 But if it cannot be extracted in this way, then take some waxed or veil-covered cloth with which birds are caught, and place that on the tip of a reed, and then wrap it around the affected area securely.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	 Then gently insert that into the opening of the ear, and then carefully dry the ear of any moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	 And therefore, if it has not been successfully removed using all the methods we have mentioned, then you should prepare to cut it before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	 And the method of performing this is that you first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein and extract blood according to his strength, then make a small cut between your fingers and turn the ear towards the divided parts above, and with a small incision in the edge of the ear, place the grease of the patient in the most affected area.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 And let the incision be in the shape of a crescent moon until it reaches the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then quickly close the incision at that moment, and treat it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	 And if the cause of the growth in the ear is one of the fats that has grown and swollen, then administer the treatment and removal of it; but if it does not obey your efforts, then take a fine spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	 and use that to excise the growth that has formed in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	 And do not do this when you think that it has already been softened by the heat of the ear, and put a lot of weight on it, and then extract from there with scissors or a fine needle, or with an incision as we have said, because it makes the extraction easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	 Here's my attempt to translate the given text:
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	 Therefore, do not stop with this until all the water is drained out.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	 And when the water has been drained out, take a piece of paper or cloth and insert one end into the ear. Extend the other end with fire until it is burned inside.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	 Then insert another cloth and do this several times until all the water is drained out, and then use a probe as mentioned above with the extracting stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	 But in the extraction of a small object entering that ear, if it is a small body and similar to it, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size which causes swelling inside the ear canal, then administer the extraction with tweezers and scissors, and its cause is lighter than all other causes that enter the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	 But in the extraction of a worm born in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary for you to look at the ear in the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And so if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract it with tweezers or fine hooks. But if no cause appears, then take a narrow and wide-tipped cannula, which has this form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	 And insert the fine tip into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; then suck with it strongly, and do this many times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	 But if the patient does not tolerate this, then you should plug and seal the circumference of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distilled remedies that the ancients have already tested in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And let your preparation be with which you instill the medicinal oils in the ear using this instrument, which has the following form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	 And make it of silver or brass, narrow, with a small hole, and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	 And thus it should be fitted so that it is in the cavity of the cannula containing what will be necessary here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	 And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it neatly around the end of a cotton swab, then put oil in the cavity of the instrument, or juice from some herb, or whatever medicine you choose to put in the cannula — which is in the ear —, then insert the ray with cotton on top and squeeze it gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	 And that which has been infiltrated into the ear should already have been scraped with fire, a little bit.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	 And be careful that the cause which you will instill into the ear is not too cold, because medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Capitol .vii.	 Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	 On the cure of earaches.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	 Sometimes some children are born with their mothers' wombs unperforated, and this also happens in some men, an obstruction occurs in the meat of the ear by a wound or flesh growing there; and sometimes this obstruction is made in the preon (forehead) of the hole of the ear which does not recognize the sound, and sometimes it is in the parts outside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	 And that which occurs in the preon of the ear, which does not recognize sound, is in the greatest difficulty of healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	 And in that which allows sound to pass through, you should place the patient's ear towards the sunlight and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Therefore, if you see an obvious obstruction, open it with a thin spatula of this form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	 If the end of it is narrow in width, one side being sharp and the other not; and let the spatula be two fingerbreadths long, so that it does not cause harm to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	 And thus if the tumor is flesh-born in the ear or the meat of it, then take that with sharp scissors and cut it down until all the flesh has been removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	 And if the tumor is in the front part of the ear, then take thin strips of wool and heat them with fire for a while, and then place them on the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	 Therefore, if you detect swelling with water that the patient finds uncomfortable due to heaviness, try to alleviate their discomfort by reducing the pressure on them; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then place in the ear cloths of linen according to the size of the hole that you have wrapped with Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or take some herbs and immerse them in water, crush them and use the liquid; and if you see the ear already draining, then it is necessary that you remove the herbs and replace them with another herb wrapped in wax made with rose oil, until the abscess has subsided; and then care for it until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
Capitol .viii.	 Capitolo VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	 Capítulo VIII: Sobre el cuidado del quelque se desarrolla en los párpados.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	 Capítulo VIII: Sobre el cuidado del quelque que se desarrolla en los párpados de los ojos, algunas veces están húmedos, otras veces secos.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	 Por lo tanto, es necesario que tengas esos con pinceladas o con ungüento, y los cortes con espátula de sus raíces, y luego coloca sobre los lugares según lo indicado.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	 Pero si el dolor viene con flujo de sangre, entonces cauteriza esos con un cauterio delicado.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	 Y la mejor cauterización es justo después de las incisiones y cuando se han repetido varias veces debido a alguna causa de sus raíces; y cuando están cauterizadas con fuego, esas raíces son quemadas y no vuelven.
Capitol .ix.	 Capítulo IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	 Tratamiento del crecimiento que se produce en los párpados de los ojos.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	 A menudo se desarrolla en los párpados de los ojos alguna cosa que se asemeja a un crecimiento en su fuerza y dureza, y por eso se llama crecimiento.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	 And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelids, both above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	 Therefore, the operation for them is to observe whether the swelling is occurring in them from something coming out of the eyelid and affecting the entire area; the cause of this is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	 Therefore, cut over that with an incision through the length, and then look for it in all parts with ease until you find it, and then suspend it with a hook and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 But if you are unable to locate the incision and can only penetrate the eyelid with slight incisions, then this should be done without any concern.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And if the wound is large, then you should close it with stitches; and care for it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	 And if it is small, no harm will come to you because the ointment from it will heal that and close it up.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 And if the swelling is descending into the inner parts of the eyelid, you should examine its interior surface; then raise the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a hook or make an incision in it, and press on all sides, and if the eyelid becomes elongated due to the incision, this is not cause for concern.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	 E at the beginning, wash the eyes with salt water; and treat the area with water that contains herbs until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	 Chapter .10
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	 Of the care for cataracts in the eyelid above the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	 Cataract is grayish in color and is formed in the tissues of the eyelid above, and it usually affects children, clouding their eyes and causing severe blindness; they cannot look at the bright sunlight because tears constantly flow from them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	 And for this reason you see these children constantly squinting, even when they sleep; and their eyelids are wet with tears, which already cover inflammation, and the presence of cataract is apparent in the eye; and when you press on that area with your fingers, you feel cataract within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	 And some way of operation is that the patient places his head on your lap, and you drape him with a cloth and make a circle around his eye according to the size that contains the cataract from all sides, and then place that circle over the eye and press with your fingers all around so that the cataract is compressed in the middle of the circle. Then make an incision in the middle of that moist area with a sharp knife, making the incision no larger than the incision made in phlebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	 "But in the case of the scrotum, it is necessary for you to cut the cord completely until you reach the testicle, because during the most serious processes, pus forms in the testicle through a crack according to the form of white bile.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	 "Therefore, extract it with the cloth that you have wrapped between your hands, and rotate it between your right and left hand until it is drained.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	 "And be careful not to push into the crack, so that with the spatula you do not reach the bone and displace it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	 "But if pus does not appear to you at the beginning of the crack, then gently push into the crack until pus is produced; and then extract it as we have said; and then immerse cloths in water and vinegar and place them on the area and tighten them with bandages.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	 "And also apply salt and place it in the cavity of the crack so that any remaining moisture is absorbed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "And then care for it until it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	 "But if a hot abscess occurs in the area, then treat it with soothing poultices until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	 "Chapter 11
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	 "On the methods of touching the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	 "When the eyelids are born with the growth of hair beneath the natural hairs and have aged, these then cause problems for the eye and lead to various illnesses such as constant tears and softening of the eyelids, which can result in the destruction of the eye, called 'touching of the eye'. The treatment for this is done in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or with sharp medicine, as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery; or the touching is done by incision and suturing; or with reeds, as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	 "And so it is necessary that you place the patient's head on your lap; then turn back the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned back, good; and if not, insert a needle into the one in which there is thread from the other side below the eyelid, and have the needle penetrate with thread above, and this should be — near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are born — near the hairs, and pull the thread to the parts above with the eyelid, and turn that back with the reed.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	 Here's the translation of the provided sentence:
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	 And if your tear is close to the natural hairs as it is in the thickness of the king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	 And then place the scalpel in one of the two angles of the vulva, and then excise it completely, and then use the thread to bind together the two lips with wool or fine linen thread, and cleanse away the blood, and make adhere whatever excess there is of the threads over two eyebrows with some glue-like substance, if you wish to do this, and if not, do not concern yourself.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	 And then leave the thread sewn for three or four days, and then treat it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	 And if you wish, leave the wound without sewing and treat it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and its adherence; but sewing is better, and thus I say this, following the ancient taxonomy.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	 But nevertheless, be careful with the patient, and it is a good procedure, and there should be no fear in doing so.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	 And there is another way to proceed, and it is that without the figure on the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and then raise the eyelid with three separate and gathered needles according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given text:
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then closely sew the two lips of the wound with suture, and care for that inside so that it may heal.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	 But if you encounter an abscess, you should open it or make an incision; then, treat that abscess with a poultice and something similar to it, as well as with ointments.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	 And sometimes it happens to the eyelid that its hairs are turned around. Then you should use on that what we have said about incision, but suture in each case is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	 To treat with reeds, it is done as follows:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	 And it is that you turn the eyelid and cut the shape inside according to what I have recounted; then, by art, make two reeds or two thin slats, whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width less than the width of a finger.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	 And you have already cut at the ends of each division, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	 Then add each one with subtlety above the excess of the eyelid, and tie the reeds of each division tightly, and leave it for a few days, because the cord through tightness will die and turn black and will fall off until by itself it falls out.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	 If it's too late, then break the skin with scissors, and immediately treat the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	 Therefore, when it is healed, the eyelid is lifted and the hair does not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	 And this is how to make two reeds according to this method:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	 and there should be the exact amount of length and width, neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter .12
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	 Of plucking stinging hairs in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	 When the hairs are unnatural, hard and rough, stinging the eyes, then the procedure is that you take a fine needle and place it in that thin thread of silk or linen, and then you adjust the ends of it and tie each one in a very fine manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	 And let the length of the threads be about the length of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	 Then you quickly tie another fine thread under it and knot the ends of that one if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	 Then have the patient sit in your seat and let it be near a good light so that your work may be seen clearly, because this is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	 Then insert the needle into the root of the plucked hair which needs to be removed, and quickly make it penetrate the eyelid until you extract that one above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	 And then, pull the hair upwards and insert it into the wax, and there should be one, two, or three hairs, but not more than that.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	 And then, pull your hand with it to ensure the hair is drawn out and inserted into the wax on the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	 But if the wax is pulled and the hair is not extracted, you will pull the wax from the sides with the thread that you have prepared for this purpose, until the wax comes out of the upper opening.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	 And check it with the vision of the eye, because when you pull out the wax and the thread, and everything is clean, close the eye and leave the closure for two or three days, until the hair attaches to its place and new skin grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	 And if the hair is too short, then you take a long hair from the natural ones, and attach it to that one, or leave it until it grows a little longer, and then pull it out.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter XIII
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	 Of the care for removing cataracts that appear on the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	 When cataracts appear in the eye and there is a contraction of the eyelid when it closes, either to the right or left side, due to poor healing of a wound, incision, or cauterization, it is called leprosy, and this cataract may be natural or accidental, caused by poor healing of wounds, incisions, or cauterizations, or similar to their unfortunate condition.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 May the manner of the operation on him be that you cut through that hardened part and separate its lips, placing between them a piece of linen cloth, and tie them together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	 And it is not fitting that you use treatments on him from those things which dry out and constrain, because if you do this, it will return more inflamed than ever before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	 Use treatments that soften, such as fenugreek, and soak it in water with altum (or althaea) seeds and linen fibers, or make a salve of diaquilon, which should be liquefied with some oils, and submerge the piece of cloth in it, and cure him with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	 And the treasure of your treatment is that you pierce thoroughly everything that is not hardened, according to the form that was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	 And this operation which we have mentioned is only a correction of inflammation that does not return the place to its former condition.
Capitol .xiiii.	 Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	 On the treatment of inflammation that occurs in the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	 This inflammation that occurs in the lower eyelid is properly called alxacrati; it can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	 Certainly! Let's translate the provided text into English line by line:
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	 And the way to perform this operation is for you to take a needle with which you have made double thread, and place that in the flesh. Then make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	 Then gently extend the flesh at the seams with the needle and sew it with the needle, and incise with a wide spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	 And thus if the shape of the eyelid is restored as needed, it is good; and if not, take the ray and place that on the divided shape, and with that turn the eyelid, making two slits in the side of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	 And let the ends of the two slits be at two corners of the incision that you have made so that they meet, and let their angle be such that when they come together, the figure of them is made.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	 And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda (Λ).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	 Then raise the skin that amount, which is the length of the sharp edge below it, so that it becomes the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	 Then adjust the separated parts and sew them with wool thread; and then cure them with the softening medicines and compresses as we have said until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	 And if it becomes necessary to raise the skin by incision, suture, or cautery, then you should make a flat incision over the hairs of the eyelid as previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	 And then separate it with the thumb between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	 In the end of the discussion on skin care, whether it is above or below, let the operation proceed accordingly, as prepared for the type of skin, and that is in the form of various spots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	 And the wise craftsman always prepares in every possible way within his ability to restore the figure to its natural form, or as close to it as possible, and that patient according to what is convenient for him in the operation and with the greatest care for the instruments.
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	 Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	 When this adhesion occurs in some people to the extent that the eyelid is solidly attached to the white of the eye and is prevented from its natural movement and functions, then you should insert the tip of a thread under the eyelid and lift it up with it, or extend it with wax.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	 And then you should carefully cut the adhesion with a sharp spatula, which should not be as sharp as regular incisions, having it blunt a little to avoid disturbing the patient during the operation. Remove the spatula so that it does not hurt the wound with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	 And let your incision be made with the utmost care, ensuring that the adhesion is completely removed until the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	 And then you should put salt water into the wound with which you will wash it; or you can pour in a solution of juniper berries dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	 And then separate the eyelid from the wound using oil, and place cotton soaked in egg white on the wound. On the third day, use consolidative herbs until it heals completely.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	 Of the incision of a nail and the prominence of flesh from the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	 Know that there are two types of nails: one is nerve-related and resembles a thin, hard shell; the other is not nerve-related and resembles white, congealed moisture. When this type affects the tear duct, it is usually taken out with pincers, cut off, and the pincers are not inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	 And both the eyelids close only from the larger tear duct, which gradually covers the vision and blocks light and movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	 But the way to perform the incision is for the patient to place their head in your lap, and then you open their eyes, lift the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the tear with the tip of your little finger, extending it towards the top.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	 Then take a needle and insert a horse hair or cow hair or ox hair, or something similar, or strong thread, and double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the tear, and penetrate with the needle, and tie the tear with thread; and extend it towards the top, and scrape off the side of the tear which is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	 And thus follow the hair to its end inside.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	 Then you incise the remaining part of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and clean the flesh of the natural tear duct so that continuous tearing does not occur after the incision.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And sometimes the tear with only one nail extended or with thread, as we have said, and then it should be scraped with a fine spatula, this is its form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 Based on the pattern and words used in the provided text, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	 And if the fingernail is not numb and you cannot insert the needle, or it is stuck in that place, then many times this type of fingernail is cured with medicine and healed as I have recounted in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	 And if you want to cut it open, then you should open the wound of the patient and take a thin blade of steel with sharp edge in this manner:
am subtilitat.	 With subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	 And if at times it is rarefied and confused and mixed in that vein, then drip from your hand into the head wound made of cinnamon or with chief rue or with salt crushed, and cover the wound until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	 And then repeat the operation on it until everything from him is removed, except for the contrary abscess which may be in the wound; for then you leave that, and cure the beginning of the abscess until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	 And then repeat your operation on it with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	 The protrusion of the lacrimal flesh, if it is noticed in the wound due to great harm, should be suspended with a hook; and you cut that from one side, and do not finish the cutting lest you cause a flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	 And then apply a drop of rose oil or something similar to the tear duct until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	 This is the beginning of a new chapter (Capitulo), which in medieval texts often serves as a heading or a section break. In this case, "Capitol .xvii." likely means Chapter XVII or Chapter 17. The text that follows will be related to medical practices or observations pertaining to that specific chapter.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	 About the incision of alguazardanic and about what is born from flesh adhering in the mouth.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	 Sometimes in the mouths of some people, red flesh is born, and it is placed over the pupil until it covers it, or it presses close to the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids towards the outside, appearing similar to a rose blossom.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	 However, the operation on it is that the patient puts his head on your lap; then you open the mouth of that person and collect all that flesh with suitable scissors or forceps; and then cut the flesh at its beginning until everything is finished with the scissors, and be careful not to let that fall from your hand during the operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	 And your incision should be made with the instrument with which we have described for the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which it is collected according to the form that follows in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 Here's the translation of your sentence:
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	 Based on the pattern you've established, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	 Sure, let's translate this line by line:
Capitol .xviii.	 Capitulum XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	 On the collection of pus in the eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	 Pus comes from veins that are swollen over the eye and prevents the eyelid from performing its function, causing the eye to close for several days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	 Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider if the eye in which there is pus is strong and there is no other ailment besides pus; then you should collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	 And you must command the patient to place their head on your chest, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your judgment; and let that ounce be of subtle gold, like this:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	 Or let there be one or two ounces gradually in the form of a body like this:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	 Then those veins should be collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and the blood should be absorbed little by little until you see that the veins are removed from the eye and they roll back.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	 And be careful not to touch the eye with the ends of the spatula; and if your operation is at midday before the sun, and you are confident in your operation so that you do not incise anything except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	 "And when you have completed [the procedure], then you pour vinegar or wine onto the head for its sharpness will dissolve what has been removed from the liver.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 "But if it is not possible for you to collect all at that moment, then you bandage everything with what alleviates the pain of the patient, and leave them thus for some days until their pain subsides and they are safe from pus forming.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	 "And then you repeat on the patient according to the same method until they are healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	 "And this is the shape of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	 "Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	 "On reducing protrusions in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	 "When you treat protrusions with a cautery or sharp medicine according to the previously described method and it does not heal, do not cut into it but rather make incisions over the swelling until it reaches maturity, and extract all the moisture within it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "And once the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackening in it, then you scrape it with an instrument of this shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	 "And it is named a sharp hook, made of iron, with a rounded head like this, which should be punctated by file or finely crafted points (as shown in the following illustration).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	 And this is done several times, and then restore the area with desiccating and hemostatic agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	 Therefore, if the area is healed and good flesh has grown there, and the body has been cleansed of infection and it remains so for forty days, and it does not recur or become inflamed, and no accidents occur, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	 And if not, then the task is not to cure it but rather to reduce the cleft to the shape of the nose, and this is how you do it: first, expose the bone using either an iron instrument or a sharp medicine, and once the bone has been exposed, then take a file of this kind:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	 The tip of the file should be triangular, and its shaft should first be thinned towards the tip in this way: as you see here.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	 Then place that on the bone, and it should be near the tear duct; and move your hand a little towards the cheek, and then roll your hand with the file until it penetrates all the way to the bone, and this allows the patient to feel better as they begin to expel wind through their hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	 Therefore, restore the area with hemostatic and desiccating medicines, as has been shown to you.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	 When the flesh is numb and the area hardened, then the substance that had spread to the outside parts returns to the nose, which makes it easier on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	 **Chapter 20.**
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	 **On the reduction of the prominence of the lip.**
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	 When the lip protrudes completely and no damage or decrease occurs during treatment, it is necessary to release the patient, then follow them, and place cupping glasses on the neck without scarification for good suction; and then place a liniment on the lip made of acacia, aloe, sesame, and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster on the lip with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	 And the manner of the powders is to take many linen cloths, and each cloth should be folded into four layers; and make many of them.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	 Then place these one on top of the other according to the amount that the lip requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	 Then strengthen them with a hard cloth and strong compression; and reapply the cupping glasses with suction without scarification; then remove the cupping glasses and leave the lip compressed day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	 And if during this time the ligament has become softened, then it is necessary for it to be very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	 And then remove the ligament day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	 And if you see that the wound has already healed, it is good; and if not, then repeat the application of the plaster with the powders and the tightening and the cupping until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	 Of the incision of the uveal tunica's prominence.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	 When there is a rupture in the uveal tunica, and it protrudes out of the eyelids like a grain of sand, and it resembles the shape of a man due to this, and you wish to incise this, then the operation on it is as we have recommended: that you insert the needle into the root of the uvea from below towards above, and then place another needle in which there is double thread from the lacrimal part, and make this penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the place of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uvea around the needle, and tighten this very much.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	 Here's my translation of the sentence:
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 And then care for the eye with water that comforts the inside until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	 And sometimes all around the eye with a cloth ring, adjusting it tightly; then pierce it with a fine needle so that the fluid drains from the eye, and let the fluid flow down the white of the eye, and lower the eye and insert it immediately afterwards.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	 And then strengthen (the eye) until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	 About the care of alconati (possibly a misspelling or variant of "alcanati," which might refer to a specific medical condition or part of the body).
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	 This disease, which is called alconati, is nothing other than water that descends on the eye and is not that (i.e., it's not what people might think it is).
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	 But the way to treat it is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight saddle, and then take their head in both your hands from two sides, so that you see the water coming to the lower parts, and then dry it so that it does not descend further, and block the light, and the patient will see the causes as they are.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	 And if it does not descend downwards, know that it is water (i.e., the condition is not serious or harmful).
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	 Certainly! Let's translate the given text line by line:
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	 When it is forgotten (or left out), then you should distill into the nose warm water in which you have mixed honey or warm water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 And then it should be treated with other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter XXII
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	 About the treatment of water descending from the nose.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	 As we have said before, there are different types of water that can be divided and categorized based on what is appropriate for treatment, which will be discussed in the following sections according to health needs.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	 Then it is necessary for you to sit the patient between your hands on a chair and tie their nose tightly with a bandage.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	 And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their nose if the nose with water is the left one, or with your right hand if it is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	 And then with your right hand take aloes if the nose is left; or with your left hand if the nose is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	 And then place the tip of the aloes near the corner of the eye by the size of a ray in the lower part of the nose closer to the smaller tear duct, and immediately peel off the aloes with skill and turn your hand with it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	 And then enter into the mouth of the wound and feel that pus has already arrived due to view.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	 And it is necessary that the measure of the path of pus to the bone be equal to the distance from the pupil to the end of the blackness, which is the crown of the wound; for you will see with that pupil through the clarity of the corneal membrane the vision of the wound.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	 Then place the pus in the location where there is water, and then you throw it down once, then another time, and if the water descends quickly, then see the patient over what he can see immediately, and pus in its wound.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	 Then wait a little while; then if the water has descended, you should place that other time before the pus is expelled.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	 And thus, when it is dried and does not descend, then you can extract the pus easily, and you rotate it a little with your hand, and then dissolve a small amount of pure salt in water and wash the inside of the wound with that; and then place outside the wound a piece of cotton or wool soaked in olive oil and egg white and lick the wound with water.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	 "However, we and those of our time use egg white on that cumin powder.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "And if your patient does not comply with the treatment of oil due to its harshness—for there are some people whose constitution is very resistant to it—then you should take the salve which is called alberid, and this is its composition:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	 "Therefore, pierce that joint with it, and do not press your hand into the wound, except to make a subtle path for the medicine.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	 "Then insert the medicine as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	 "And you must complete your work by preparing a quiet, darkened room for the patient to sleep in on their back, and they should be prevented from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	 "And place under the nature of the patient something that will make their condition milder, and do not move the head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	 "And let the treatment be administered according to the patient's disposition for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	 "Then release the patient into that darkened room and expose them to cool air, and make them see some objects, and then resume the treatment within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	 And it is not necessary that you do this during the time of the treatment or immediately after the injection.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	 It is important that you remove this because the water may slightly increase due to a strong and intense reaction.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	 However, if an abscess forms, then it is necessary that you release the pus after seven days, and correct this with water to make the abscess soften.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	 Then you should cover his face and place an oral cloth over it so that his vision is directed downwards for a few days, keeping him in the darkest place possible.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	 And then he should be gradually removed from that darkness and returned to his usual habits.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	 And know that in surgery, the student is not exempt from some observations, and then you should be prepared for the procedure.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	 And it has come to our attention from some of those who are in the art, and some say that he made fire in the Ayrac (airway) by perforating it with which water is drawn out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	 However, I have not seen anyone in our land who has achieved this, nor have I read about it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	 And these are the forms of the species of Magdaan that should be applied to those who are ignorant of them.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	 And they should be made of iron or steel specifically, and their ends should be sharpened with this subtlety to form a triangle, with the pointed end being the shape as described.
Capitol .xxiv.	 Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	 About the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	 When different kinds of flesh are born in the nose, resembling the sting of a scorpion or a polyp, and this ailment is called a polyp because it resembles that fish.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	 And if the flesh is cancerous, or gray in color, then it is a lion's flesh, not gray in color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	 Therefore, in this type of lion's flesh that is neither fraudulent nor cancerous, the patient should sit between your hands and be placed in the sunlight, and you should wash his nose, and pick out your ounce in those fleshes.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	 Then extract it from the divided parts, and then divide what you have grasped with a sharp, subtle spatula from one part until you know that all the flesh has been removed; because if any remains of it for some reason by which the cutting is possible, then you should scrape it away with one of the subtle instruments with ease until none of it remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	 Here's the translation of the given text:
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	 Based on the provided text and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, I'll attempt to translate this line by line:
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	 If the nose is open and from it moisture enters the palate, then know that he has already been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	 However, if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you should know that there is nothing but flesh inside him in the upper parts of the nose, to which an abscess has not yet come.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	 Therefore, it is necessary to insert a thread into the nose, to which some wax has been attached; and place nuts between each nut the size of a finger or less, and instruct the patient to insert one end of the thread into his nose with a reed or another instrument that is available to him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	 And after he has done this, let him pull the thread until it reaches the passages of the nose, and comes out on his throat; for often children in schools do something similar to this action, and it is an easy task for anyone who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	 Then place the two ends of the thread, one end coming out of the nose and the other remaining inside it; and then administer a meat hook with nuts that are on the thread, and do this until you know that the meat is already with the nuts on the thread.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	 And then extract the bile, and place in the nose near the bloodletting a funnel, and do this for three days or more until the ointment has completely dissolved everything that is rotten in the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	 And then at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	 But if you prefer to use a different method, you can use that one instead.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	 And this is the shape of the tool for the nasal purger with which oils and medications are distilled into the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	 And make it of silver or brass, which should be similar to a small open lamp, with a small bowl and the mouthpiece similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	 And if you wish, make a closed tube similar to a reed, and the tip of the nasal purger should be flat and open; to which there should be a handle on its end, with which you can hold it when you blow into it oil or water that you want from the juices and absorbable causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	 And these nasal purges are precious: take castor bean, white henbane, ginger, and saffron flower; long pepper, scabious, and spikenard, six ounces in total, mixed with the juice of beet and cabbage, and made into pills. Let one pill be dissolved in warm water, and let it be poured into the nostrils of the patient lying down.
Capitol .xxv.	 It seems like you are referring to a medieval medical text, potentially written in an old version of a Romance language or possibly Old French. Here's a line-by-line translation attempt for "Capitol .xxv." based on the context provided:
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	 "From the nails that are born in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the sentence:
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	 And for this, it is necessary that you introduce it at the beginning of their appearance, and then describe everything.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	 Then place over the area either a cautery or a burning medicine that was in its place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	 But if the incision is delayed until it becomes enlarged, then consider if it has become hardened, dark in color, and with little sensation. In this case, do not touch it with iron, for it is a crancous abscess; for many times it happens that he who incises this abscess suffers great harm to the one on whom he performs it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	 And if the abscess is of a gentle touch and not dark in color, and if incision is possible in all cases, then evacuate the patient and incise it without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	 On the Suturing of the Nose and Lips and of the Ear when Continuity is Lost Due to Injury or Similar Cause.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	 Know that when there is a loss of continuity in one of these cartilaginous areas, you will perform this operation only on some people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 When you need to treat any of these causes, consider whether it is a fresh wound with its blood, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and then care for it until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	 And if the edges of the separation are already separated and each is healed, then you should carefully scrape each edge until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then adjust the two lips with stitches and strengthen them, and on top of that sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and finely chopped herbs. Place a thin layer of emplastrum diapecos or another consolidating emplaster over the powder, and let it lie for two or three days, then remove it and replace the emplaster, leaving it until the threads break by themselves, and then care for it with ointment until it heals.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	 However, the method of stitching is that you close the separation with needles as we have described in the stitching of the abdomen, or close the separation with thread as you know how to do.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter XXVII
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	 About the removal of that cause which appears in both lips in the inner parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	 Many times it happens to many men in the inner parts of their lips there appear hard lumps resembling pigeon droppings, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	 Therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips and folds each of those hardnesses completely, and then fill the place with lard until the bleeding stops, and then wash it with vinegar and treat the place with water that is astringent, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	 About the incision of the flesh attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	 It is not uncommon to find flesh attached to the gums, which the ancients called albulus. Therefore, you should suspend it with a hook or whatever you have with the scissors and incise it along its length, letting the pus or blood flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	 And then place on the spot lard or other astringent or drying powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	 And if that flesh returns, then incise it again and cauterize it, for after cauterization it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	 For tooth pain with a fever.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	 When on the surface of the teeth, both inside and out, and between the gums there are rough scabs that are hard and sometimes blackened, and they are made yellow or green until the gum becomes corrupt and the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	 Therefore, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and rest his head on your lap, scrape the teeth where those scabs appear and make them look like sand until none of their causes remain, and thus remove the blackness, the yellowness, and the other discolorations until they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	 So if that has been removed as described at the beginning of the treatment, then it is good; but if not, you must repeat the treatment on those teeth for another day and the second and third days until it reaches the final outcome that you desire.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	 Know that teeth require many rasps of various shapes and sizes according to your operation's preparation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	 And for this reason, the rasp used to scrape from the inside of the tooth is different from the one used between teeth, according to other shapes. Therefore, these forms of rasps must be prepared as you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	 Chapter 30
D’eradicacio de dentz.	 Of tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	 Instruct that you cure the tooth of its pain with all skill and delay any extraction as much as possible, because there is no reason to rush its removal once it is extracted, since it is a vital substance until it is removed from the body.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	 But when the patient insists on having that tooth extracted, you must be absolutely certain which tooth is causing the pain, because often the pain deceives the patient and they think it is in a healthy tooth. If you extract that tooth, the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been removed, for we have seen this happen due to the actions of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	 Therefore, when you are certain which tooth is causing the pain and you know it well, then you should scarify around the circumference of the tooth with a spatula that has some virtue in it, until the gum is separated from the tooth on all sides. Then make the incision carefully with your instruments, or with fine forceps little by little until you reach the tooth.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	 Then speak to him strongly with great words or strong language, and place the patient's head between your knees so that it does not move, and then extract the tooth in a straight manner so as not to break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	 And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it under the patient in such a way that it covers all parts with ease and exerts pressure to remove the object as was done at first.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	 But if the tooth is broken or decayed, then it is necessary for you to fill that cavity with cloth and tightly fasten it with a thin ray so that it will not break during your constriction of it with tongs.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	 And it is necessary for you to work very carefully with scarification around the entire circumference of the gum and be careful not to break or split it, otherwise return to the patient for an even greater evil than his first pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	 And beware of doing what some ignorant barbers do in their stubbornness and audacity when they extract teeth, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they cause great evils to come upon sick men that are more difficult than they can handle, and the roots of them all, or some of those, or that you might extract that with some bones of the jaw as well, just as many times we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	 And before removing it, his mouth should be washed with wine or vinegar mixed with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	 And if there is bleeding through this, like many small openings, then sprinkle some powder on the wound and if that does not help, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	 The shape of the forceps and delicate pliers with which the tooth is first removed should be of a long handle and short shaft, thick for this reason: that they may not be bent when you are using them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	 And the handles should be so thick that when tightened with those they are not bent, but short at the tip.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	 And they should be made of Indian iron, straight at the tip, and at the tips of those there should be teeth which interlock with each other and are strongly tightened by constriction, and sometimes the tips of these should be in the shape of a heron’s beak, which is hooked, and are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	 About the extraction of teeth and the removal of broken jawbones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	 When you need to extract a tooth that is broken, there are some reasons for this. Then you should place a cushion with padding over the area for one or two days until the area is softened; and afterwards introduce pliers or tweezers, the tips of which are similar to the beak of a bird called a heron or stork, in the form of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	 The given text appears to be from a medieval medical treatise written in Occitan, an old Romance language that was widely spoken in southern France and parts of Italy during the Middle Ages. Here’s a line-by-line translation into English:
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	 And if the patient does not obey you and is restless with these forceps or tongs, then it is necessary for you to cut into the flesh and strip away all the meat, and introduce the instrument which is called atali, which is a small lever, the form of which is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 And it should have a short, thick end, and not be blunt to prevent it from slipping.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	 Therefore, if the cut is pierced in this way, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments, whose shapes are as follows: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular tip, with some thickness on it:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	 The shape of the second instrument should be triangular and with a finer tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	 And already having been helped by this instrument, which has two ramps, the shape is approximately like this:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	 and with other instruments that will be used for the rasping of teeth; because first it is done with this instrument which resembles a large onion, and this is its shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 with a twisted or short triangular tip, which should have some thickness, and not be blunt to prevent slipping.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	 And know that the instruments for removing teeth are similar and similarly shaped as the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	 Here's the translation for the first source sentence:
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Based on the provided lines and the similarity to medieval Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's my best attempt at translating the given sentence into English while maintaining the original structure and language use:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	 And if there is any swelling in the patient, reduce it gradually and hold or contain it with the mouth so that it does not increase or spread until the bone of the whole (area) is healed; then restore the area with appropriate medicines for this purpose.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 But if there is a slight sore on the bone, then scrape off that sore and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	 **Chapter XXXII.**
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	 **On the care of protruding teeth over others.**
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	 **When the teeth are protruding and do not follow their natural shape, especially when they are directed towards women, particularly older and venerable ones; therefore, you should consider: if one tooth is close to another and cannot be pulled or leveled off, then extract it; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then incise it with this instrument, the form of which is like a pig's snout, and let it be made of very sharp Indian iron.**
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	 **And your incision should be made over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, so that another tooth is not affected.**
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "And if it is a prominent tooth that needs filing down, then file it with an Indian iron file of this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	 "And it should all be made of Indian iron; and it should have very small points like those found on files used for making needles. The tooth should be filed little by little over many days with care, so that another tooth is not also affected and lost.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	 "Then smooth that edge at the end, and scrape it with various scrapers.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	 "And if it is a tooth whose edge has been chipped and bothers the tongue, then you should file that edge so that its roughness is removed and smoothed out, and filled in so that the tongue does not get hurt and speech is not impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 "Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	 "On the restoration of missing teeth with a gold or silver file.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	 "When the front teeth have been knocked out or removed by a blow or fall, and the patient cannot chew properly with what remains, and you have treated him with astringent medicines but your treatment has not worked, then for that reason place artificial teeth in those spaces using gold rather than silver, because silver turns black and quickly deteriorates over several days, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	 The text seems to describe a procedure involving a thin and thick substance (possibly oil or another liquid) applied between the teeth. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	 And then proceed by inserting the needle into the beginning of that part, and strengthen your hand with skill and agility so that it is not shaken.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	 And let your grip be firm on the needle with which you strengthen the ties, ensuring the teeth do not loosen.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	 And then cut off the excess threads with scissors or forceps, and add those to each area skillfully, turning them and hiding them between the healthy tooth and the injured one, so as not to cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	 And then leave it thus tightly bound like this.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	 But if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another thread in such a manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	 And this is the shape of the teeth and the configuration of the connection of two healthy teeth and two injured ones, as you see these tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	 And when one or two teeth are to be returned to their place, then properly position each one in its location, and let them grow again as we have described, so that they may heal.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	 And only do this if you are a skilled craftsman and wise.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	 And sometimes it is appropriate to use the bone of a cow for this purpose, and it is made in the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth has failed, and it is strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves with that for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 This appears to be the chapter number or title of the text, similar to how modern texts use "Chapter X" or "Section Y". It's not a full sentence meant for translation into English. Instead, it likely serves as a heading or reference point for the medical treatise. Therefore, no direct translation is needed as it functions more like a label than a complete thought.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	 "In the case of a complaint that affects the tongue and prevents speaking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	 "This complaint that appears below the tongue sometimes is natural with which one is born, or it is accidental and happens due to a wound that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	 "And the operation on it is that you should open the mouth of the patient, with his head inclined towards you; and raise his tongue, then proceed to cut this nerve complaint until the tongue is freed from its tension.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	 "But if there is any hardness or knot in it, and this has happened due to the healing of a wound, then you should pour oil and cut through until you have cut the complaint and the knot has been dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	 "And be careful that there is not a tear in the flesh and that you do not cut any blood vessel, causing blood to flow.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	 "Then clean the traces of the incision with vinegar, or with hot water, or with cold water; and then place a linen cloth beneath the tongue. This is the method that you should use to keep the patient's mouth open every night so that it does not become hardened again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	 If there is a flow of blood, place powdered vitriol on the spot; but if the blood comes out, then cauterize the spot with an old cautery that is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 And continue to care for him with other remedies until he is cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter .xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	 To extract a ranula from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	 Sometimes there occurs under the tongue an abscess resembling a small bag, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function; and it is greatly enlarged until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	 And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth sitting in front of the light and look at the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	 And if you see it as dark in color or black, hard, and the patient does not feel pain, then do not touch it because it is gangrenous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 And if it inclines towards whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you insert a lance into it and cut it with a fine scalpel, and divide it from all sides; and if blood comes out during your operation, then place powdered zegi (which is vitriol) on it until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 And quickly return to your work before you have completed it with him, before he has been washed with vinegar and salt; and care for that [wound] with the other remedy until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 **Chapter 36.**
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	 **On the removal of an abscess from both ears and from the throat, as well as other abscesses.**
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	 When an abscess appears in the throat like cotton, which are called glands that swell outside and are named tonsils, if you treat them with the water we mentioned in the section and they do not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, dark-colored, and insensitive. In such a case, do not touch it with an iron [instrument].
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	 But if it is red in color and the root is large, then do not touch it with an iron due to the flow of blood; rather, leave it until it has ripened, and then either you will pierce it, or it will burst by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	 And if it is white in color, painful, and its root is thin, then this is the one that should be cut open.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	 The operation on it is what you should consider before your operation, whether the abscess has already subsided completely with rest or if it has diminished somewhat; then make the patient sit facing the sun, and let his head be turned to his right side, and open his mouth wide, and the servant taking hold of his tongue between his hands presses it downwards with an instrument that is very fine in form.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	 And it should be made of silver or steel, and it should be thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	 So when you press on the tongue with it and an abscess appears, and you catch it with your clothing, then take a needle and insert it into the abscess, and pull it out as much as you can towards the outside.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Another thing that draws something from the tunic, and then incise it with an instrument of this shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	 and it resembles forceps, but the tips of it are curved, so that the opening of each one is in the middle of the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron and well-tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	 But if this instrument is not available to you, then incise it with a spoon of this shape: and let it be sharp on one side, and not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	 And after you have incised one abscess, incise the other in the same manner, and then the patient will heal from the cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 But if there is bleeding, heal with water of decoction of pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves, and similar to the causes that are hemostatic until the blood flow is stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	 Sure, let's break down this sentence and translate it line by line:
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	 And I had already treated a woman with an abscess that was located in her throat, which abscess tended to be of a dark color and caused little pain, and it had already closed her throat, and the woman breathed with difficulty, and I had forbidden her from eating and drinking water, and she would have died within one or two days if she had persisted.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	 And the abscess had grown so much that it had formed two openings through which it drained.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	 So I cauterized one of the openings with a hot iron and removed it, and a large piece came out with it. Then I cut that opening until I reached the other opening, and then I closed her mouth, pressed her tongue down, and inserted the hot iron into the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	 And then I removed a large portion of it, and only a little blood came out of it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	 Therefore, her throat was completely healed, and she began to drink water immediately and then started eating food. Since I did not stop cutting away at that abscess many times for a long time, another abscess appeared in its place, which I cut until it extended along the entire length of it.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	 Certainly! Let's translate the text line by line:
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Based on the pattern from your previous example, I would guess that this means "Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	 Of the incision of a boil when it is ripe.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	 When the boil is deep in the skin and is ripe and long, it is called a perpendicular incision. And if it is in the fatty tissue, it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	 But when it is healed with the water that we mentioned in the division, and you do not complete your treatment, and if the boil is cauterized already and is subtle, then you should incise it as if it were round; and if it is of that length, and it is bloody, dark or black, and it does not feel good to the touch, then you should attempt to incise it, because in this there is danger for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	 And when you see it according to the manner that I have described its whiteness and length, make the patient sit up and press their tongue with an instrument of the same form, and then place the thumb on the new boil, pull it down and incise it with one of the two instruments mentioned in the incision of a nipple.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	 And it is necessary that you not introduce anything into [the patient] except what is appropriate for the natural opening without addition, because if you introduce too much, you will obstruct their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 And for the insertion, use that which we recommend for the insertion of two needles, and ensure that it enters until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 But if the patient is frightened by the insertion, it is necessary to use ingenuity in cauterizing him without fear. The method of cautery on him is only with sharp water, and you should place the patient's head on your lap, and then press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned, and then take the water we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and make it live with that cause, and place it not too thick or too thin, and with that fill the cavity of the instrument which has this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	 Let the extremity of the cavity in which the medicine is placed be like the cavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the tongue, and let the patient drink from his own side so that saliva or mucus comes out of his mouth due to the introduced medicine, so that nothing falls onto his throat and it does not descend into him.  (Note: The phrase "de aquela deguna causa" is a bit uncertain, as the exact meaning of "deguna" in this context isn't clear. It could mean something like "any reason" or "any cause," but without more context, it's hard to say for sure.)
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	 And then take the medicine in your hand and squeeze it onto the uvula for about half an hour until you see that it is darkened and soothed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	 And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the end of the ray [probably referring to a medical instrument], and dip the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cotton into a tube until the cotton adheres to that tube. Do this as many times as needed to achieve the desired cauterization of the grape, and then leave it there so that it will dry out and fall off in about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	 And if you need to reapply the medicine, reapply it, and after cauterization, clean around the grape with cotton soaked in cold water, rinse with that water, then wash with warm water, and treat externally with embrocation, and internally with gargles until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	 And this type of cure is more reliable and longer lasting.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	 Sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it can be cured with subfumigation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, dried arabic gum, chamomile, borage, and similar herbs. Mix all these ingredients, or some of them, in a pot, and let them soak in vinegar. Then boil the mixture; the pot should be well-luted with luting clay. In the middle of the pot, there should be a small hole, over which you place a concave instrument made of silver or iron like this:
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	 And if you need to intervene by inserting the extremity into the patient's mouth until the steam reaches the uvula and covers it, until the uvula is well covered.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	 And then you should repeat this process on the other visible moles until they are dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of an abscess formation, as it would cause too much pressure on the abscess, which is undesirable. Instead, you should wait for the declaration of the abscess by a cautious physician.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	 But if this instrument is not present, then take a reed and make a closed end from an egg at the extremity of it, so that the patient's mouth is covered, because the closed end of the egg prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	 And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	 Of the removal of thorns and of water that sticks in the throat, and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	 Many visible things stick in the throat or a spine of a fish or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	 Therefore, you must extract the water that is visible from these things, on which the sight falls, and then press the tongue with an instrument in front of it, so that what is in the throat becomes clear to you.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	 And that which is not visible and hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food has settled in the stomach, because when the cause linked to the throat is expelled through vomiting; or if the patient swallows a piece of bread or a radish of lettuce or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sponge seaweed and mix it strongly with honey, then make the patient swallow it, because when it reaches the place where there are thorns, it will be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	 And take an eel and mix it with honey, and place it inside the mouth and make sure it is extracted when swallowing; or take a leek and place it in the throat and then remove it by sucking.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	 But if they are not expelled with those causes that we have mentioned, then use a lead instrument of this shape:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	 And it should be thicker than a little finger, and at the end of it there should be a concavity that you can insert into his throat easily.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	 And he should lift his head up, and you must ensure that the contact of his throat bones is such that it reaches the body and peels off the bone or thorn, or what this physician does with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	 Here's the translation of your provided sentence:
Capitol .xxxix.	 Chapter XXXIX
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	 About the extraction of blood-sucking leeches attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	 When treating the blood-sucking leech with water as described in the division of treatment with medicines and not with cautery, consider then in the throat of the patient towards the sun, after you have compressed the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	 Therefore, if you see the blood-sucking leech, extract it with a small hook or with fine tweezers carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	 And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and then place an ignited iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the blood-sucking leech is dead and separates from the throat) and let the patient abstain from water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	 Then take a full bladder of cold water and open the patient's mouth into it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not swallow any of it, and move the water back and forth with your hand for an hour, because the blood-sucking leech, as soon as it feels the water, catches.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	 "But if it has not been forgotten with that which we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument which we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	 "Do this, so that it may happen; in whatever way it falls.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	 "And another method of operation in fumigation is that you take a vessel filled with ignited charcoal and cover the vessel with a lid, through which there is a hole; fit the extremity of the instrument into this hole. Then place the vessel over the patient's head. The patient should place his mouth on the extremity of the canula (reed), and close his mouth so that the fumigation is not lost until you know that the fumigation has reached the vein, because the blood will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	 "And if it does not fall, then you should repeat the fumigation many times, and make sure the patient does not drink, but only eat salted and dry food, and do not drink water. And it is necessary that with this treatment the patient will be cured.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	 "And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodletting from the neck vein is performed when it is visible; and it is similar to forceps as you see, except that in it there is some curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Capitol .xl.	 Capítulo 40
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	 Which is the summary of the discussion on abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	 Abscesses are different species, of many kinds, according to how they are remembered, each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	 And they are different in their piercing and incision according to two methods: one by the type of abscess itself, and the other by what we understand about their humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	 And the second method is according to the places in the body where they occur, because an abscess that occurs in the head is different from one that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy place is different from one in a joint; and each has its own treatment for operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	 And there are some abscesses that should not be pierced until the pus in them has matured or reached its completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	 So there are other abscesses that should be pierced when they are fresh and not yet matured according to their nature, such as abscesses near the joints, because an abscess that is close to a joint extends its existence until it can reach what is around it, and quickly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess near a main member, and if you delay piercing it until it has matured in the main member; or it is near the buttocks, therefore pierce it while it is unripe; and it should not be pierced raw, with undigested matter, except that which is near the buttocks, so that its pus does not spread and extend to the inner parts of the buttocks, forming a fistula or an unhealed wound in its term.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	 But you should know that the time for piercing the abscess is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	 And know that it is matured when there is the subsidence of pain and fever, and also the decrease in swelling and pulse rate, and the acuity of the abscess head, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	 And this is why you should know that the puncture should be made in the lowest part of the abscess and from where pus can drain easily.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	 And puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the palms or soles of the feet, and in areas of the arms, cords of the nerves, and armpits; and finally, in all places where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	 But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to leave the puncture until its digestion is confirmed according to the rules we have mentioned; because if you puncture before that, the body of pus and much filth are prolonged, and the edges of the abscess become hardened and deep.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	 "But some apostemas (abscesses) are perforated according to the thickness of the flesh or the body, as necessary, or according to what the affected member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	 "And it is necessary to administer a small perforation in smaller abscesses, and in larger ones, a large and wide opening or multiple incisions, depending on the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	 "Other abscesses are of those in which it is necessary to make a concave cut and incise, when done thus that the pain subsides, as happens with trophic ulcers and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	 "And there are those that are incised with a three-sided section; and of these is the one that is incised like the shape of a myrtle leaf, such as the abscesses of the inguinal region.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	 "And there are those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, similar to the previous ones.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	 "But in those cases where it is not possible (to administer a specific section), such as superficial lion abscesses, you should perforate them with a superficial or flat perforation only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	 "And it is necessary that when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you perforate it and do not be concerned with extracting all of the matter in that moment; having extracted a portion from it, then seal the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this several times according to degree until it is fully emptied.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	 And especially if the patient is a young child, or a pregnant woman, or an elderly person in decrepitude, because the vital spirit often departs with the discharge of blood, and the patient dies easily, and you open (them).
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if in the abscess a part of the intestine or skin has been cut off, then you should fill it with clean wool or thread made from linen cloth, just as when you have wounds or cuts, without moisture; and strengthen that for three days; and then proceed to treat and cure it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	 But if there is bleeding during the operation, then you should administer cold water and vinegar in which mulberry leaves have been steeped, and place a linen cloth soaked with this mixture over the area of the bleeding several times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	 But if the bleeding persists, then you should administer remedies and treatments and use powders that have been recommended in many places in this book and in other sections.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	 But if it is in the winter and the area of the abscess is a place with many nerves, then you should soak wool in vinegar and hot oil and place them over the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 And if it is in the summer and the areas are fleshy, then you should place wool soaked in water and oil or vinegar and oil over them, and keep everything cold until the third day, as we have said. Then you should open the abscess, clean it, and administer to its treatment whatever is appropriate for it until it is healed. 》
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	 And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of all abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already explained about every abscess in which way is the path of its cure specifically by chapters.
Capitol .xli.	 Chapter .41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	 About the incision of abscesses that occur in the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	 In the nape of the neck are small abscesses, and these are of two types: nodules that contain tunicates on their surface; and the types of these are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	 And of them are boils, and among those are ones that contain moisture similar to pus.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	 And of those are the ones that contain moisture similar to dust, and resembling them; and among those are the ones that are stony, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	 And in the incision of all these, and in the removal of them there is no fear, because the removal of them does not cause opposition to archery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	 And the operation in the incision of these is that you should probe them with an instrument whose form will be described below, which is called a trepan; until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	 Because if what it contains is moisture, then you should incise it with a longitudinal incision by means of a surface incision in this manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	 And it begins with the incision from line B to line G. When the moisture is evacuated, you should scrape that part which contains the moisture, and do not leave any cause of it, because too many views return if anything remains of it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	 And then you should submerge the cotton in Egyptian ointment, if available, and if not, in water with salt; fill the wound with it and let it sit for another day, because with water you will corrode everything that remains of that layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	 And then apply more Egyptian ointment over the cotton, rubbing and polishing it if necessary, until you are confident that no trace of that layer remains; then heal the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	 And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you should incise it in this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	 with a cut in the shape of a cross, and make an incision between two lips of the cut and scrape it from all sides, and apply your skill in extracting the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	 But if you encounter resistance with the incision, then do what I have told you earlier.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	 It seems like the text is discussing a medical procedure involving an abscess or boil (apostema). Here's a line-by-line translation:
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	 Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	 Certainly! Here's the line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	 And stop the perforation of those at the lowest part for relief of the body from illness in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	 And then care for those with water that is appropriate for healing.
Capitol .xlii.	 Chapter .42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	 On the incision of scrofula occurring in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	 Often these tumors appear in the neck, armpits, and groin; sometimes they occur in other parts of the body as well.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And those that occur in the neck, and most of which are engendered among them, and all scrofula of these is within its own proper tunic, just as in the nodes and tumors of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	 The types of these scrofula are many, for some of them are stony, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not obey treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	 Therefore, in that one which you see is of good constitution in the touch, whose visible color is close to the color of the tendon, and is smooth on all sides, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, or to the veins, or to the arteries, and is not hard, it is necessary that you incise that with a superficial incision from above to below the body of the line of G to between the lines of B, and cleanse all around, and extend two lips of the tendon with an ounce, or with many ounces if you need them, as we have said in the tumors of the head, and draw it out little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	 And it is more careful that the vein or nerve is not cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	 And let the spatula not be too sharp so that you do not harm yourself with a cut, or disturb the patient, and cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or an artery and prevent yourself from continuing your operation, then apply to the wound powdered vitriol or other powders that stop bleeding, bind the wound, and allow it to rest so that the acuity of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes softened and begins to suppurate.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	 When the blood has been shed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	 Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	 And then ask with the index finger if there is any other cause of scrofula, then cut and clean those as well.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	 And if the scrofula is near a large vein, it is then necessary that you do not cut the scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	 Before that, it is necessary to ligate it tightly with a double ligature and leave it so that it falls off by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	 And then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	 And if you excise that whole scrofula, then you should close the two lips of the wound immediately with stitches so that no superfluity remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	 However, if you see that there is still superfluity due to the size of the scrofula, it is necessary for you to understand how to excise its root, and extract it, and administer a stitch, as has been said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And those scrofulas that contain moisture should be perforated with a shallow perforation here at the place of their maturation, and place the perforation so that the pus drains from the bottom, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	 And then apply an ointment similar to this one, for the purpose of corroding what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	 And when you see that the wound is already clean, then cure it with a flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	 Chapter .43
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	 On the incision of the pustule caused by an abscess in the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	 The ancients said that this incision should be made on the pustule, but I have not seen any man in our land who has done it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	 And this is the writing of their speech.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	 But in men who have a scrotal hernia, the removal of the intestine should be avoided because through this method it cannot be healed, since all the veins and major vessels of the patient are located here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	 But in those who have abscesses cauterized in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the throat, it is necessary to use the cutting of the intestine to avoid the loss that is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	 Therefore, when we want to do this, we must cut the intestine below three circles of the intestinal circles, or four with a small incision in length between two circles for size, so that the incision is in the fat, not in the cartilage. This place is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and its blood vessels are thin.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	 And if the doctor is timid, then he should extend the tongue with tongs, and then split the tongue until it reaches the pharynx, but avoid the blood vessels if any of them are seen.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	 Then cut the uvula as we have recommended; and it is indicated for the cutting of the pharynx by the flame that comes from this, which disrupts speech and causes loss of voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	 And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	 Therefore, when the hour arrives at which the perforation is feared, add two lips of the sheath to the wound, and sew it shut without using a needle.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	 Then administer medicines that cause the flesh to grow until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	 And Albucasis says that the summary of what we have recounted is nothing but this: see that some of these tumors have already taken the gullet of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and his soul has dried up, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes through the place of the wound for some breathing, and is saved from death.  />
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 And for this reason, I command that the wound be left open until the malignancy of the illness is consumed; and it is malignant for three days; and then I command that the wound be sewn up, and treat it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	 And what I myself have seen is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her throat, cutting off a piece of the lung's pipe with it; and I was called to care for her, and found the woman as if she were dead, and discovered the wound and found blood flowing from the wound in small amounts.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	 Based on the provided context and the similarity of the language to medieval Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	 And do not reprimand the servant unless they speak in a hoarse voice, and after about a few days, return to their usual duties.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	 And now I say that in the case of an epileptic seizure, there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	 Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	 When a swelling occurs on the gullet outside, it is called a hernia of the gullet.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	 This swelling named hernia of the gullet is a large swelling according to the body's color and is very common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	 And it occurs in two ways, for it can be either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	 And the natural one is not difficult to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	 And the accidental one is of two kinds: the first is like large knots, and the second kind is like a swelling caused by constriction of an artery, which is dangerous.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	 And it is not advisable to apply pressure to it with an iron only in the case where it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And you should examine it and investigate it with your hand, and if you find that it is like large knots and not connected to any of the veins, then you should incise it as you would a knot, and extract it with water containing linseed and bursiclam; but if not, then you should carefully consider its entire being, and afterwards cure the area with appropriate healing water until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	 It appears that this is a chapter heading rather than a full sentence. Chapter headings are typically brief and serve as titles or indicators of what the section will discuss. In this case, "Capitol .xlv." likely means "Chapter 45," indicating that we have reached the forty-fifth chapter in the text.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	 "On the cutting of the various types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	 "There are many types of nodes, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	 "And it is necessary that I explain the difference between a node and an excrescence, as there may be doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	 "So I say that in the case of an excrescence, there is heat, fever, and severe pain until the boiling of the excess liquid subsides; and when the process of putrefaction is complete, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	 "But in the case of a node, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and I tell you that this is called 'leon' in the proper language.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	 "And it is according to the color of the body; and its beginning is like a bean, and it is made in this way, whether large or small, and they are of two types: either they are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I will say in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 "So it is necessary that when you arrive at the treatment of a node, you probe it and inquire about its beginning with the instrument called 'intromes,' as its form will be described in the following chapter.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	 And then measure your hand according to the size of the abscess, and then extract the contents and observe what has emerged from it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	 And if there is an outflow of moisture, regardless of its color, then you should cut it open with a shallow incision, as mentioned for other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	 And if there is no moisture from the contents, know that it is pus.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	 And place over it a dressing in the shape of a cross like this:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	 just as you have been taught, and suspend it with a hook, and carefully peel off the skin from all around, and keep the hair or bag, if possible, on top of that, and draw out the pus with the scoop.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	 However, if it bursts during the operation, it is not possible to draw out that pus, and you should watch closely for this, and then you should extract it bit by bit until nothing remains of it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	 Because if any part of it remains, either a little or a lot, the pus will return according to its nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And if you see that any small part remains, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, strengthen the wound, place over it a tight bandage to prevent another abscess from forming, and treat it as described until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	 And if the need is great, then you should sew up both lips of the patient and treat them with water that heals.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	 But if the vein is pulsatile or non-pulsatile, then you should cauterize and fill the spot with powdered vitriol, and leave it for two days or three until the wound improves and the boiling of the blood subsides; then return to cut what remains of the need.
Capitol .xlvi.	 Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	 On the shapes of the instrument necessary for incision and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	 The forms of the instruments are three kinds: one is large, one is medium-sized, and one is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	 The form of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	 The form of the medium-sized instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	 The form of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	 They are made of iron, with curved ends to fit well in the holes.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	 And these are the forms of the hooks, and they are named "albered," and one of them is called "berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	 And there are three kinds: one is large, another is medium-sized, and another is small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	 "The shape of great experience, his form:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	 "The shape of moderate experience, his form.
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	 "The shape of little experience, his form.
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	 "Therefore, it is appropriate for these to be treated with those poultices, exits, and fistulas, because of the bones among them and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	 "And they are made round, thick, like lions, and also with large needles with which the saddles are sewn, and they are made of copper wire or iron or silver, and the best ones are when they are made of copper wire.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	 "And they are made with black feathers by experienced persons, who know that through these openings the fistulas in the hollow of which they lie should be opened, so that they may be reflected back into their proper places by their lightness.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	 "And they are of three kinds, because some of them are long, others medium, and others short, according to the width of the fistula and its narrowness.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	 "The form of great experience with lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	 "The form of moderate experience with lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	 "The shape of small experience with lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	 "The shapes of the hooks are of many kinds, for some are simple, having only one curve, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	 And of them is made an ointment, and it is of three spices.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 And from those is made an ointment having two curves, and it is of three spices.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 And from them comes an ointment with three curves, and it is made of three spices.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	 And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	 The form of a simple large ointment, its form is as follows:
Forma de unci simple migier:	 The form of a simple large ointment:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	 The form of a simple small ointment, its form is as follows:
Forma de unci orp gran:	 The form of a large greasy ointment:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	 The form of a medium-sized greasy ointment, its form is as follows:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	 The form of a small greasy ointment, its form is as follows:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	 The form of a large ointment having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	 The form of a medium-sized ointment having two curves.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	 The form of a small ointment with two curves.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	 The form of a large ointment with three curves.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	 The form of a medium-sized ointment with three curves.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	 The form of a small ointment having three curves.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	 And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are made of three spices, because from them come large, medium, and small ones.
Forma de scapel gran:	 "Form of large scalpel
Forma del scapel migier:	 "Form of a medium-sized scalpel
Forma de scapel pauc:	 "Form of a small scalpel
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	 "The ends of those with which the incision is made are sharp and the other ends are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a way that there is a fear of cutting a vein or nerve during the excavation of the nodes, so that the patient may be healed and find some relief from the heat caused by the excavation of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	 "And these are the forms of scalpels, which come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	 "The form of a large magnet
Forma de magda migier:	 "Form of a medium-sized magnet
Forma de magda pauc:	 "Form of a small magnet
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	 "They are made of iron and resemble a ray, with which a collyrium is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	 "And it is in the sharpened end that is concealed with a spatula, and on that one goes towards the divided parts inside and outside, when you want, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	 "The forms of spatulas, which are hidden among the aforementioned for the perforation of abscesses and which patients do not feel, come in three sizes: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	 And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	  The forms of blisters with which blood flow is cut off are of three types: large, medium, and small.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	 They should be made of ram's horn, round with some length, and should be subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	 And you should have these three types of blisters — large, medium, and small — so that you can quickly cut off the blood flow when necessary, especially in cases where medicine is not initially effective.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	 However, do not use them to cut off blood flow in all parts of the body; use them only on fleshy parts, such as the thighs and buttocks, arms, breasts, abdomen, and shins, or similar fleshy places.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	 And sometimes these tools are made in the form of small vessels similar to surgical scissors, with which blood is cut off when done by phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	 And sometimes they are made round like this:
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter XLVII
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	 From the care of men's breasts that are similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	 Some men's breasts become swollen; you should advise them to sleep on their backs when they begin to grow. And as the breasts swell and resemble women's breasts, they are often inflamed and itchy.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And when this happens, it is necessary to incise those with lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and then remove all the grossness, and then fill the wound with a red medicament, and then sew the two lips of the wound together with stitches, and cure him until he is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 But if the breast becomes soft and flaccid like a woman's, then cut it into two halves along its upper part with two crescent-shaped incisions, each contained within the other at their ends, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form between the lines of B and G. And then remove the skin that is between the two lips of the wound, and take away the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and the powders necessary for the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you have not completely healed the incision that needs to be made due to the restlessness of the patient and blood flow, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a cotton swab soaked in corrosive ointment and let it soak until the wound is clean from the fat, and then cure what has been cleansed so that it may heal.
Capitol .xlviii.	 Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	 Of the piercing of abscesses, which is called lancing.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	 These abscesses that are called lancing are of the species of scrofula, hard, which contain a pus that is black.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	 And of these, some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity should be lanced with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line .G. to the line .B. And when everything is evacuated that is in the abscess from the flesh, then you fill it with old cotton and let it sit until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	 And then the cotton should be removed and treated with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	 And if the abscess is of the species of nodes or scrofula, then you should cut it open in the same way as we said in the section on scrofula.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	 If the wound is extended such that it may cause suppuration, then administer a cautery to them as we have previously mentioned.
Capitol .xlix.	 Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	 On the incision of abscesses that occur due to archery or venom.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	 When the arrow is broken and the string that is on it is tightened, then many inflamed abscesses occur. And the signs by which it can be known whether inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: because when the abscess is due to archery, it is long drawn in the front of the body; and when you prick the abscess with the aforementioned things, you will feel in him what is called stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	 And that which is due to vein is round at the front of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	 And the incision of this abscess is an error, and especially in those that are below the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	 But in those that are due to inflammation of the opening of the arrow, make an incision in the string along its length; and afterwards widen the incision with hooks near the arrow, and free it from the tunic until it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	 Certainly! Let's translate the sentence line by line:
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	 And then puncture the area that is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood in it comes out and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 And then administer a cure in which powder is generated until the ligaments fall out, and then treat that with suitable ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	 And if the abscess is due to a cut vein, then you should have water nearby as much as possible of the abscess with a rope, and then insert the needle under the area that you had under your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be a double thread until you draw it out from the other side, and then bandage the abscess well according to what I have told you in the binding of grape leaves on two parts with two ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	 But if you fear that the thread will be drawn out, then insert a thin thread with the same needle throughout all of the abscess until the initial incision of the needle, and strengthen these threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	 Then dry the abscess in its middle part until when it has drained what is inside it, then you incise the excess of the rope and leave what is bound to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then place on the patient's wound the one you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the cure that is made with calcined materials and ointments until they are healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	 Chapter 1 on the abscess which occurs due to a twist of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	 So it happens that an abscess occurs in the bowel and in the vein, and similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when there is a percussion or excessive labor on them, by resemblance.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	 And it is most common in the areas of the ankles or the sole, or in any place where the joints are aggravated.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	 And it is a severe abscess, resembling the color of other parts of the body, and it is most prevalent in those who lack their natural dispositions, and when it is narrow with intensity, the patient feels something like numbness.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	 And the abscess is not collected in the front of the body, and for this reason it is left behind, and it is affected in all parts but does not go to the parts before or after it.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	 Therefore, for those who have abscesses in their joints, it is not advisable to be filled with iron, because very quickly they will contract a fever.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	 But he who is in the head or forehead, treat him with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	 But if it is a small abscess, then cut that one out with scissors and incise it carefully.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if it is large, then suspend it with hooks, and excoriate it, and immediately remove it; and close the wound with sutures, and care for it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	 Chapter 2
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	 On the incision of an abscess which occurs in the area where the intestine is located at the stomach.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	 It happens to many men who are observed in their stomachs and other parts of their bodies those which are called fungals by similarity with mushrooms, the cause of which is subtle but the head of it is large; and already the lips of them are turned outward, and they are of those which are small, and they are very magnificent.  (Note: The translation for "funguals" could also be "mushroom-like" or "fungus-like".)
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	 And I have already seen one, and in his stomach there were two things which were more like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, of small cause.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	 And already the lips of those were turned outward and they split, and moisture ran from that all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	 When I cut into them, I found one with eighteen punctures and the other with six punctures.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	 And the operation in their incision is that you should consider if the patient is humid, and the color of the abscess is white, humid, of subtle reason; then you should incise with a spatula lat, and there should be cauteries present in the fire, because many times you must expel much blood from it; and if the blood comes out, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	 And if you see the patient is weak and fearful, be careful not to incise with iron; but rather take freshly made lead ointment, and strengthen with that abscess, in the manner we have said; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	 And then adjust in the tightening of the lead thread; then, do not stop strengthening the large lead on the abscess until it is burst and falls out by itself without effort.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	 But if the abscess is of great size, then there is some cause for fear and dread in its incision, especially when it is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	 But it is possible that you cut open most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	 And then care for that person until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	 And be careful not to presume to cut open that which is of a dark color, has little feeling, and shows little regard, for that is also cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	 And I will come back with the memory of crab close to this.
Capitol .lii.	 Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	 About the treatment of swelling at the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	 Swelling at the navel is caused by several things: either by breaks in the skin that is on the belly, from which the intestine or intestines come out as happens in other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or artery, as has been said before; or by trapped wind.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	 But if it is due to a break in the skin and the coming out of the intestines, then the color of the swelling will be similar to that of the body; it is without pain, and soon appears in various places.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	 And if it is due to the coming out of the intestines, then the swelling will be more varied and stronger than what we have said, and when you press on it, it seems hidden, and soon returns; it is also very light, and very much desires baths and strong work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	 "But if due to moisture, then it is a lion and not hidden when pressed with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor does it swell.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	 "And if it is due to blood, then the appearance of the abscess will be blackening.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	 "But if it is due to flesh, then the abscess is serious, large and hard, and fixed in quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	 "But if it is due to flatulence, then touching it feels like a lion [i.e., it has sharp edges or points].
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	 "And the operation on it is that you should consider if the prominence of the umbilicus [navel] is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or flatulence; then you must be prohibited from treating it, for there is fear and danger in this, as has been taught to you in the chapter where I spoke about abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	 "And if the prominence of the umbilicus is due to the intestine or hernia, then you should command the patient to have his hands on his hips, and be standing extended; and then feel with a tent around the entire umbilicus, and then command him to stay between your hands on his hips, and then encircle with spatula lat around the umbilicus over the place that you felt with the tent; and then extend most of the abscess to the sides above with a large hook; and then bind around it with strong thread or silk in a decent manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	 And then carefully slice the middle of the extended abscess on the skin and insert your finger into that opening; if you have found and secured it with the skin, then extract the intestine and push it back inside the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	 And if you have found the intestine, then take it with a hook; and cut away its excess parts.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	 But if it is contrary to your bowels or veins, then go around that area, and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert into each of them a strong thread, and insert the two needles into the circle you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, causing them to penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place open so that the extended flesh may dry up and fall off by itself; or cut it when it has dried up and healed, and then cure it with water from the appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	 And if the prominence of the navel is swollen with flesh or moisture, then it is necessary that you proceed to open the abscess as we have said and extract the pus or moisture found within it, and then cure it with water that heals and strengthens the place.
Capitol .liii.	 Capítulo 33 (or Chapter 33)
De curacio de cranc.	 Sobre el tratamiento del cáncer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	 Ya hemos dicho, en la división, sobre los diferentes tipos de cáncer y cómo se puede tratar con medicinas, y que es preferible el tratamiento con hierro para que no cause úlceras; y hemos hablado del cáncer en su causa y precaución.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	 Y los antiguos decían que en algunas ocasiones el cáncer puede ser eliminado de un lugar donde es posible la extracción, como en el caso del cáncer que se encuentra en las mamas o la pelvis y sus miembros adyacentes, para extirpar todo lo que esté afectado, y especialmente cuando comienza pequeño.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	 Sin embargo, cuando está avanzado y es grave, no conviene abordarlo, porque no he podido curar a nadie de esto ni he visto a otro hacerlo, ni que haya llegado a un resultado favorable.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	 Y la operación en él, cuando se encuentra como hemos dicho, es que tú actúes primero y dejes al paciente y purgues con hiel negro algunas veces, y luego sángralo si hay una evidente plenitud atrófica.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	 And then prepare the patient with the preparation in which he will be placed for the operation, and then provide him with those tools that are necessary; and then ensure that all parts are thoroughly cleansed with good soap until there is no remaining cause of his illness.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	 Let the blood flow and do not stop it hastily; express the areas and cleanse all the clotted blood thoroughly with your hand or with an instrument suitable for the task among the available instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 But if there is excessive bleeding from the vein or an artery, then cauterize it until the blood flow ceases, and then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	 Chapter .4
De curacio de ydropici.	 On the treatment of dropsy patients.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	 We have already mentioned, in the division, the species of dropsy caused by water and the signs of each species, as well as their treatment with medications.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	 And the one that is cured with iron is only the species of althitis alone, and it should not be treated with iron in the case of tympanites or hypothermia, for this is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	 And when you have treated this species of tympanites dropsy with medicines and your medicine does not work, consider that if the patient has already become weakened by it or by another illness such as a cough or abdominal pain, do not treat them with iron, for there is danger in doing so.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	 Sure, here is the translation for the given sentence:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	 Based on the given context and the similarity to medieval medical treatises in Latin-based languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	 And then consider if the origin of the dropsy is from the intestines, for it is necessary that you perform a section [incision] away from the navel by three digits towards the lower parts, on his right side over the pubic bone.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	 But if the origin of the dropsy is from a liver ailment, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	 And if the origin of it is from the spleen, then your incision should be on the left side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	 And it is not necessary that your incision be on the side where you want to treat the patient, so that the superfluous humors do not flow to that cold place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	 And then perforate the vein with the instrument, and then introduce it into that incision, and lift your hand with the spatula between the vein and the knife, and you extract that; and if [the quantity] is of one nail or around it.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	 And then pierce the knife until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And then extract that and insert an instrument of this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	 and it is similar to a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or lead, at the end of which is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its tip is cut in the manner of a feather quill, as you see:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	 And on the uppermost part of his extremity is an armilla, because when the instrument reaches the water, they must immediately remove it from the instrument, so that in the following hour it evacuates as much water as possible. For if you cause it to evacuate more than necessary in one hour, the patient will die very quickly due to the loss of his animal spirit, or he may suffer from cynanche, which is a sign of approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	 But evacuate according to the patient's strength, and according to what his pulse and complexion indicate to you about his constitution.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	 And immediately after removing the instrument, retain the water that has caused the problem by means of a cord that retains the hole on which you have been instructed to pierce in this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	 And the next day, and on the following days, if the patient can tolerate it, reinsert the instrument, and extract a small amount of water each time, doing this for several days, taking care to ensure that very little water remains.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	 However, if you fear for the patient and leave a large amount of water, then cure that by burying it in hot sand, and move it in warm baths, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with desiccating medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	 And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen near the extraction of water, as I have mentioned before in this preceding text.
Capitol .lv.	 ### Chapter LV
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	 ### About the care for infants born with unopened urinary passages.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	 Sometimes one of the infants is born from its mother's womb with the head of its urinary passage not open (or it is very narrow or not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	 Therefore, one should pierce him with a subtle probe as soon as he is born, in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	 And place a thin lead probe into the opening and tie it there, and leave it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	 And when he wishes to urinate, remove it so that he can urinate; then replace it again.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	 And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine going to this place will not leave through this opening. ismeyntre
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	 But that one whose passage is narrow should be treated with a lead probe, as we have said, for several days until it becomes enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	 But those in whom the passage is not in its proper place are called such because their cause is that for these infants, the one who is born with his passage facing towards the tip of the penis cannot urinate towards the front inside, until he raises his penis upwards with his hand; and this is not due to congenital defects, because semen cannot reach the mother in the correct manner, and it is a very serious illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	 Based on the provided translation method and the text you've given, here's a line-by-line translation of the source sentence:
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	 And be careful in your operation to control the blood flow, for this often happens; and press on the patient with something that will stop the bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	 The text you've provided appears to be a fragment from a medieval medical treatise written in what seems to be a Romance language—likely an early form of Spanish or Portuguese, given the similarities to modern Spanish and Portuguese. Let's translate it line by line into English:
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	 Based on the given text and its translation, here's a line-by-line translation of the source sentence:
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	 Certainly! Let's break down this line by line and attempt a translation:
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	 "And of these, one is malignant and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	 "No-maligna means that you should suspend it with a fine thread and cut it until it becomes completely empty; then place a cotton pad soaked in Egyptian ointment on it; and then treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	 "And if the abscess is malignant and has a dark color, then you should administer a cautery near its opening and its cause.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	 "However, if the abscess is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis and one part of the abscess is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you should remove the inside part first until it is healed; and then you treat the outside part, because when you treat both parts together with the foreskin, it is not guaranteed that it will not be narrowed.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	 "And if you see blackness and corruption in the genitals and foreskin, then it is necessary that you remove everything that has become blackened and will decay or has already decayed; and then place on it something with honey, which is mixed with finely ground and sifted pomegranate peel and crushed cumin seeds.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	 And then care for him with another remedy until he is well.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	 But if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	 For the cautery to be effective, it must address two issues simultaneously: stopping the flow of blood and treating the wound when it becomes infected.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	 And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed in that moment, then you should insert a lead tube into the opening of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	 In the case of adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those whose foreskin is healthy and for whom circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to injury or abscess), it is necessary to separate them with a blunt spatula until the adhesions are dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	 And if it is difficult to separate them exactly, then you should excise some of the skin from the head of the penis and the foreskin. This is because the foreskin, being thin, is easily perforated due to its slight thickness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	 Here's the line-by-line translation:
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	 And then it should be treated with six strong styptics until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	 Chapter 57
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	 About the cleansing of infants and the care of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	 Circumcision is not a solution for incontinence like other diseases; but since it is our operation and our will, and its effects are mainly on infants, it is necessary that we indicate the best operation and easier way to preserve their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	 Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they did not use it in their laws. And the reason is that we have acquired this practice through experience. Because of this, I have found most craftsmen and barbers practicing circumcision and cleansing with a razor and hot towels; and they use a ligature with thread and incision with a nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	 And I have already tried all these methods and did not find a better cleansing with scissors, with a ligature with thread like the one used in cleansing with a nail, because many times the skin slips above, because the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and the lower layer remains, and it is very likely to lead to another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	 And with cleansing, which is done with alphecati and is fingertip-sized like what shoemakers use, the incision of the tip of the male member is not secured because it enters very quickly into its hole.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	 But in the operation with a nail, quickly observe iron and ruin your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	 And the child's penis is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	 But the cleansing that is done with scissors and ligatures with thread is of great benefit, as I have discovered through experimentation. The scissors are of proportionate incision, for this reason: the sharpness on top is the same as the sharpness below; and thus when you press your hand so that the two sharpnesses are in proportion, and you make an incision following a comparison at one time; and it is made with compression of the thread in the shape containing the penis from all sides, with which there is no error whatsoever.  The translation provided uses modern Spanish terms for "scissors" (forfexs), "thread" (fiel), and "penis" (vergua), as these are more familiar to English speakers than their medieval counterparts. Additionally, I've used "sharpness" to translate "acuitat," which is a false friend in this context, as it does not refer to the sharpness of the scissors but rather to the points or tips of the scissors. The sentence structure has also been rearranged for better readability in English.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	 And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child remain calm if it is one of those who understands a little, then do not proceed but rather place the hand on its stomach for as long as necessary, and leave it to rest until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	 Then proceed to cheer up the child in every way possible so that they can regain their consciousness.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	 And then have the child stay between your hands steadily prepared, and do not be restless; and hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see those or any of the other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	 Then insert your hand into the child's stomach and blow into the opening, and pull it in until the tip of the stomach is emptied, and then clean it of any accumulated filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	 Then tie the marked place with a double thread, and then tie a second knot slightly below that one, and then take hold of the said knots and press them together with good tension, and cut between the two knots.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Then gently lift the opening and pull out the stomach; then let the blood flow little by little, as this is better; and place powder on it, and on top of the powder place a cloth in which musk oil has been sprinkled, prepared with rose oil recently boiled in water; and leave that on it until the next day; and care for it with care until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	 The form of the forceps for modification is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	 The fingernails should be non-cutting, and the others should be cutting, so that the edge of the nail is not protruding, and the length of the two cutting edges should be equal to the length of two handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	 But the mistake in modification is that if you remove the entire internal thread or a part of it, you should insert it again.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	 Therefore, you must stretch that for your time with your nail in front of the affected area and insert it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	 And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a hook and insert it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	 But if three days have passed and the swelling remains under the affected area, then you should let it be until the abscess has softened, and gently scrape that away, and insert it as you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	 And beware of the tip of the wire, for it will not be good for him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	 And therefore treat it with that which solidifies the wound from the powders that we have listed in the section on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	 And if he has been injured by an excess of cold, and it is treated according to the instructions above, this will not harm him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	 And continue to treat him with what we have said until he is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	 Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	 On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	 Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction made by a stone or congealed blood, or by pus or tumor, and this is similar to what we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	 And if the urine is not dissolved and the retention is caused by a stone that has already reached the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be bent over his knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	 Then place the patient's feet on his shoulders and stretch his belly out from above his shoulders, and let the patient squeeze his thighs as much as he can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	 Therefore, at that moment the neck of the bladder is constricted and the stone is expelled to the parts behind, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	 And if it is not dissolved by the water that we have mentioned, and the cause has been made clear on the patient, then a syringe must be administered to him with an instrument called a syringe, which looks like this: Let it be of silver and have a subtle curved shape, just like a quill from a bird's wing with the subtlety of a long ray, in the likeness of a palm and a half, at the end of which there is a subtle reed.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	 Certainly! Let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	 And make a cross over the patient on the saddle, and insert the bladder and penis with moistened oils, olive oil and rosewater.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	 And then introduce the pipe with ease until it reaches the end of the penis; then double the penis over its base; and then push the pipe into that; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and that is what causes the patient to be emptied in a void state, and this is not done according to this order, but rather the meat in which it goes awry.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	 And then draw out the filthy liquid with wool little by little, because the urine dries the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	 Then draw that out and apply as a remedy the urine, and use the pipe, do not cease doing this and use the pipe until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	 Chapter 59
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	 Of the type of enema for the bladder with a cupping glass and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood, or it is narrowed by burning, and you want to distill water and medicines into it, then do so with an instrument called a cupping glass, and this is its shape:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	 "As long as the extremity of the patient is numb, it remains closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	 And in that, there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	 At the beginning, there is a concave place, in which what is peeled off is located. According to the quantity that oppresses that [place], without addition, it enters until, when some cause pulls the humors away from that [place], it is pulled out; and when it is expelled, water is also pulled out; and when it is expelled far, just as a clamp-like device with which naptha is applied in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	 Therefore, when you want to expel humors from the bladder, insert the end of the clamp into the humidity and pull out with it the water that has been pushed to the upper parts, because the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	 Then insert the end of the clamp into the penis as we have described in the chapter on the foreskin; and then expel the humidity with water, because that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	 The shape of the subtle catheter with which the bladder is catheterized, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	 "And let it be made of silver or lead, the tip of which should resemble a small feather, and then insert it inside gently.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	 "Then take a pig's bladder and put in it the moisture you want to crystallize, then tie it between two strong bands with double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	 "Then insert the tip of the crystalizer into the liquid.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	 "Then press your hand on the bladder with the liquid until the patient feels that the liquid has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	 "But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; pierce it all around its circumference; then insert strong thread into those holes so that they are sewn shut; then add the circle so that it is well secured, since you place in it the water or other liquids that you want.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	 "Then tie it to the instrument and use it in the same way as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the liquid reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	 It seems like the text is missing or incomplete. "Capitol .lx." likely indicates the start of a chapter, with ".lx." being the Roman numeral for 60. Without additional context or sentences, it's challenging to provide an accurate translation. However, if you can provide more of the text, I would be happy to help translate it line by line into English.
De extraccio de peyra.	 "De extracción de piedras." (About the removal of stones.)
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	 "We have already mentioned in the division the species of stones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of the latter.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	 "And we have mentioned the stone in which the operation is performed with the hand and sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	 "And the stone generated in the bladder properly speaking is that which is placed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	 "And I will relate this with a clear explanation and summary.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	 "So I say that the stone generated in the bladder mainly appears in children; and among its signs is that the urine exiting from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and sand appears in it; and the patient frequently touches his penis, and often he goes to urinate, and soon he becomes restless; and with this he has forcibly defecated.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	 "And the cure of children from that is easier before they reach fourteen years old, and it is a difficult cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	 In young people, it is more common because they are among those [who experience this].
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	 And concerning that one whose stone is larger and the cure is more pleasant; if it is small, it is contrary to that [one].
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	 Therefore, when we come to the cure of this condition, it is necessary at the beginning to cleanse the patient with a clyster that extracts all the gap that is in their intestines; because sometimes this gap prevents the expulsion of the stone due to its investigation.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	 Then take the patient by their feet and hold them up in such a way that the stone will descend to the bottom of the bladder, or will move from its place sometimes.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	 Then make that incision between your prepared hands, and let the patient's hands be free from their clothing, so that the entire bladder will be made to lean towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	 Then look for it [the stone] and remove everything.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	 Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then quickly incise on it with a secant.  />
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	 And if you do not feel it entirely with your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil the index finger of your left hand, whether the patient is a child or the middle finger if they are a mature youth, and insert it into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	 "And seek out the stone until it is beneath your tongue.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	 And turn that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	 And press on it with your finger, and expel it to the external parts at the place where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	 And command the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend the knees with their right hand, and with their other hand pull back the skin that is under the knees, in the area where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And then insert a speculum, the shape of which is as follows:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	 And cut into it the space that is between the anus and the knees, not in the middle, but rather towards the left side of the thigh; and let the incision be over that stone, and your finger should be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the external incision is wide and the internal one is narrow according to how much of the stone can be extracted, and no more, because if you press too hard with the finger that is in the anus, the stone will be forced out without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	 And know that there are some stones with angles and edges, which makes their expulsion difficult.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	 And about those [stones] it is like a bean, round in shape, and its expulsion is easy to do.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	 Therefore, if it is the one with angles and edges, place it in the slit.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	 And if it is not like that [round], then you should cleverly contrive over it or apply a gentle pressure to it, the end of which should be like a file with which you press against the stone, and do not let it slip away; or insert a thin instrument with a curved tip underneath it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	 But if you cannot [remove the stone] in this manner, then widen the passage a little, and if you see blood flowing out, cut it off strongly with powdered vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	 But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you should push your hand into the bladder's opening, and then cut it out; and then push a little more; and similarly do this if there are more than two stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	 And if the stone is very large, it is ignorant to cut it out with a large section, because this causes one of two things to happen to the patient: either they die or they develop continuous urine dripping, because the place [where the stone was] is not completely healed.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	 Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloes and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	 And place over that cloth infused with oil and wine, or with rose oil and cold water, so that the abscess may be gently drawn out.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	 And then lay the patient on their side, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	 And when you have removed it, wash the area with water and a little oil, and then treat it with fine ointment and with diaphoretic ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	 But if in the wound there occurs a mild abscess that is adhesive and corrosive, and it resembles frozen blood as if the blood were congealed in the bladder and for this reason urination is blocked (and this is known by the excretion of blood with the urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains, it will provoke the bladder to rot and cause putrefaction in the patient.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And then wash the wound with strong vinegar, water and salt, and with opposition to all manner of putrefaction, according to what is suitable for him in the cure until he is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	 And it is necessary during all the treatment that you lift both cushions and adjust the medications that are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if the stone is small and is in the bladder, and it is inserted into it, and voiding urine is prohibited, then cure that with water as I recommended earlier to prevent dryness, for excessive treatment by this method has been accused of causing dryness; and I have tested this, and it is that you take a needle made of fine iron, the shape of which is as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	 with a pointed triangular end, sharp, inserted into a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	 Then take flax thread, and tie the bladder with it below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	 Then insert the iron needle into the bladder, piercing gently until the needle reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	 And turn the needle with your hand in the stone little by little, and you will pierce it through until you make it come out on the other side; for the urine is immediately released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	 Then press your hand on the opening where the stone has exited from the bladder, for it is sharp and will be expelled with the urine, and the patient will be healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	 If this cure is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents it, then take a rope and place one end under the stone, and the other end over the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	 Then quickly descend onto the stone on that crossbar between two ropes.
E aprop extratz aquela.	 And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	 Then unbind the ligature and remove the clotted blood from the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	 And it is not necessary to tie the rope under the stone, but only so that it does not return to the bladder. The other ligature on top is only so that when the rope is untied near the edge of the stone, the chain returns to its place and covers the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	 And for this reason it is necessary when you tie the rope on top, that you lift the chain above the parts or return to your starting point, and cover the wound in this way as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	 Chapter 61
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	 On the Extraction of a Stone from Women
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	 A stone in women is rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	 However, if a stone appears in one of them, then the cure for it is difficult and is prohibited by many ways.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	 One of the causes is that the woman is very virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	 And the second cause is that you do not find a good woman who reveals herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or one of the women having husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	 The third cause is that you do not find a good woman who knows this art, especially the operation with the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	 And the fourth cause is that the location of the section on a stone in women is far from the stone's location, so you need a previous section, and this is fearsome.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	 But if necessity compels you to do so, then it is necessary that you take a skilled midwife, and few are found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	 But if you are deprived of her, then look for a skilled and subtle surgeon, or present a well-trained midwife in women's matters, or a woman who is knowledgeable in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	 Therefore, present her and command her to do everything that you tell her to do, from the inquiry about the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is that she should first check if the woman is a virgin, and then insert her finger into the woman's vagina and search for the stone. ️
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	 "Therefore, if one finds it, cut it off under its own tongue, and then command the patient to spit onto it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	 "But if it is not visible, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and move it around until she finds the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder and applying firm pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	 "Therefore, once it is found, it should be gradually removed from the bladder's orifice through the urethra until it reaches the pelvis.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	 "Then insert the end of a catheter into the bladder, and move it around until you feel the stone, and do not remove your finger from the stone while cutting underneath it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	 "And the initial incision should be small; then insert the ray into that incision, and if you feel the stone, adjust the size of the incision according to the size of the stone so that it can pass through.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	 "And you should know that there are many types of stones: some are small and large, round and pointed, long and short, and some have edges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	 The translation of the given text into English is as follows:
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 And if you see blood flowing, place crushed vitriol on the area and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	 And make sure you have prepared the instruments used for stone removal in men, so that you are assisted by them during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	 And if you see blood flow and know that the bleeding is from an artery, then place powder on the area and press it firmly with a cloth and a bandage, and do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not remove it, for the patient will soon die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	 Then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 Therefore, when the bleeding has subsided after several days and the area has healed, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	 Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	 On the incision for hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	 A hydrocele is nothing more than an accumulation of fluid in the white sac that is left behind by the testicle cord containing the ovum, and it is called a sac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	 And sometimes it is in the proper tissue that nature has prepared for the ovum until another ovum is made, and this is the cord of the testicle between the white sac we mentioned earlier, and this is not water but liquid.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	 And the cause of this hernia is weakness that occurs in the genitals, because to those it is infiltrated with this matter, and sometimes it happens due to a blow to the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	 And this humidity has various colors, for its color is either fading to yellow or red, or reddish, or black and feculent, or watery white, and it is the latter that is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	 And the signs by which one knows that this accumulation of water is present are these: because if it is in the white cyphac that we have mentioned, then the swelling is round and slightly elongated like a figure of an egg, and it appears in the genital area, because the humidity contains that part on all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	 And if the humidity is in the proper fatty tissue, then the swelling is round like half an egg, and for this reason one estimates that it is another egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	 And if the humidity is between the genitals and the white cyphac, then it is like a bag hanging down.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	 And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you prove the color of the humidity in the swelling with a small piece of white cloth; and according to what appears on the trace of the cloth, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	 When we come to the care of him with iron, it is necessary that we command the patient to be bloodletted if this is possible for you, and often let his body bleed.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	 Then let him be laid on his back over some cause a bit higher, and place beneath him soft cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	 Then sit yourself on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand at his right side, who should extend their hand to one of two sides at the fold between the thighs and the division of the navel of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	 Then take a lancea spatula and cut through the fold between the thighs from the middle to the length until near the anus.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	 And let the incision be made equally distant from the straight line that you should follow along the pubic bone until it reaches the white fat layer.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	 And scrape it off, and observe, and be careful not to cut too deep; and your incision with which you scrape should be divided downwards until it is suspended by the most subtle and finest investigation possible according to what is possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	 Then pierce the fat layer full of water with a wide puncture, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	 And then separate between two lips of the section with scissors, and extend the thread to the divided parts above; do not touch the testicles, comprehending the genitals, and cut the thread in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	 And cut that part completely or in pieces, and especially its thin edge, for if you do not examine the incision thoroughly, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	 But if the swelling proceeds from outside its testicle during your operation, then after you have completed the cutting of the thread, return it inside, and then join the two lips of the genital sac with stitching, and then treat that area as the other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	 And if you find the swelling corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary for you to cut the vessels that are over the ligaments, and extract the testicle, and then treat it with the water we mentioned.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	 But if the water is gathered in two similar parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore, cut that part just as you have done with the other one; and if it seems to you that it is one operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	 And then you clean the blood, and insert between the sections wool soaked in oil or rosemary oil; and place another wool soaked in vinegar and oil outside, and spread it over two knees and the navel of the belly; and place above folded cloths and pills, and tie them securely with a bandage that is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	 And then two cloths are taken and moistened with carmenated wool according to this manner; the ends of which are used to press the area with cotton or wet wool, are added securely in the groin area of the pants. One end takes from the buttocks into the back, and the second takes from the crotch, and two ends below on two cushions, and two other ends above on two pillows, and all pressure is adjusted in the groin area of the pants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	 And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of a scalpel; and it is that you take a fine surgical knife and cut with it the cord of the testicles, and it is ignited as we have prescribed until the white bladder containing the water is revealed. Then you take the cautery in this manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	 And it resembles Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	 And then puncture with that needle, and let it burn until all the moisture has been expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	 Then extend the needle with pincers, and scrape with pincers, and burn subtly with a pointed cautery; and cut that which is possible for you until you have eradicated all of it; and beware of the egg so that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	 And know that this operation is safer and more distant from blood flow, and better than an operation with cutting.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	 But if any swelling or abscess forms during the time of cutting or cautery, or if there is bleeding, then you should treat whatever problem arises in this manner, with the care that is appropriate for it as has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	 But if the patient is very sick and does not expect to survive a second operation because of its severity, then perform perforation as I recommend here; and it is when you are certain, from what we have said about the signs, that that hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	 Then you should have the patient lie on a raised seat, then puncture the abscess in its lowest part with a lance, and let the puncture be as long as the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	 And it should be an opening wide enough for all the water to flow through.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	 Then place a cotton cloth over the area and tie it securely in order for the remaining water to flow out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 And then treat it so that the wound may heal.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	 But if there is resistance to the egress of water at that time, you should pierce it: and this is done only because the white membrane in the orifice of the wound creates resistance and prevents the exit of water, therefore you must insert into the wound a pen or instrument with which water is extracted from dropsy patients, the shape of which has been described above; or adjust a small opening in the opposition of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	 And know that the water will return, and it will accumulate again after about six months or a year; and when it is accumulated, then it should be pierced in the same manner, because the patient will thus endure his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	 Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	 On the incision for a flesh-based hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	 Know that in the incision of this hernia, there is great fear of loss through mishap in the major dispositions; for I have seen its dismissal and being saved by this method as the best.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	 And I am remembering the operation in that case and the characteristics of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	 Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in the bodies of those whose humors are corrupt and this happens for many reasons: either because of acute bitter excess which is infused into the humors, or because of a blow.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	 And the color of the abscess corresponds to that of the body, and if pain is not found in it, it is a serious abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	 And if the abscess is hard and light, it is calcified, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	 And sometimes it is caused by the knotting of the arteries, and by the inflammation of these so that its memory is already perceived, or by the inflation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	 But that which is caused by the inflation of arteries is known by the dispersal of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	 But that which is caused by the inflation of a vein does not disperse at all from it for any reason, due to compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	 And it is possible that incision can be made on this type and on other fleshes; and it is that you cut the vein of the humors, and then extend the egg to the separated parts above, and extract what is white from it, and deliver the suspenders of the vessels, and tie them, and incise the suspenders after you have delivered all the parts of the egg.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	 Therefore, if the egg is already cooked with these foods, then it is necessary for you to remove the egg and insert it again.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	 And if there is an adhesion between the bladder and the intestines, or between other parts of the body, then it is necessary for you to remove all that adhesion and insert a round probe.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	 However, if there is a growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which lies behind it, then you should insert everything that belongs to it and remove the egg as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in olive oil and wine; and afterwards, care for it with another treatment until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	 Chapter 64
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	 Of the treatment of a hernia that is caused by wind.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	 Wind is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a bud with swelling of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	 And in the treatment of this disease, one must be mindful of its cause, as has been previously mentioned.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	 Nevertheless, it is necessary to say that the operation should be performed according to what was done by the ancients.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	 Certainly! Let's translate the provided medieval medical text into English:
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	 "Then cut transversely with a sharp blade through the right side of the vessels until they are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	 "Then scrape away all parts as we said earlier in the removal of arrows that are lodged in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	 "Then insert a needle with a double thread into those locations where the wound occurred, and tie it at the beginning of the wounded area, and then again at the end.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	 "Then cut those areas straight through the middle according to the length of the body, and remove what has accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	 "Then treat the wound with the treatment used for other wounds in which you want health to be restored, so that the vessels may close and heal without causing harm.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	 "But if the wound affects all the vessels, then it is necessary to remove the testicles or to tie off the testicles along with the vessels, so that he is deprived of all nourishment due to the severing of the vessels and they are cut off, or tied off so that they do not swell with them.
Capitol .lxv.	 It seems that you want to continue with translating medieval medical texts. I'll be glad to help you with this task. However, it is essential to note that without more context, it might be challenging to provide a precise translation for each line due to the archaic language and potential variations in terminology.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	 About the treatment of internal hernias.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	 The onset of this hernia is due to a cut that occurs in the small intestine extended over the belly, because some of the intestines exit through that rupture into the abdominal cavity.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	 And this rupture can be either of the small intestine or of its skin, and these two types occur for many reasons: from a blow, from a fall, from a shout, from lifting something heavy, or from resemblance.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	 And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the small intestine, is that it happens little by little over a long time, and not suddenly, because the small intestine presses on the abdomen.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	 And the sign of it is when it is due to a cut in the small intestine, because at first it causes sudden and intense pain; and there is an apparent swelling below the navel, which is due to the escape of the intestines, and the body of the hernia appears outside the small intestine. 🔥
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	 And sometimes the intestines come out with the skin, and this internal hernia is called an inguinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	 And sometimes it is done with ventosity, and sometimes it runs in the intestinal rupture, and here it is retained, and this is very harmful to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressure is applied.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	 And in the treatment of this disease with iron, there is fear that the wound may become infected.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	 And the method of operation for this is to instruct the patient to return the intestine with their hand to its inner parts if it returns; then place the patient on their side between your hands and raise their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	 Then place the thread which is the thread of the testicles on top, and cut the thread of the testicles completely along its length; then insert into the two lips of the section scissors according to what you need to open the section with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	 And if the section is such that, as far as it is possible for you, the egg may be expelled from it.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	 Then remove that tissue which remains after the thread of the testicles, until the hard white thread is revealed on each side.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	 Here's the translation of your sentence:
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	 And you should ask yourself if there is any cause of the intestine being wrapped in a white, hard cloth.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	 But if you find any cause from him, then you should remove it to his stomach afterward.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	 And then you take a needle with a thick thread made of x threads, and insert it through the back of the cloth that is under the tail of the scrotum, which is the incision; and then cut off the ends that protrude from the thread until they are four threads long, and then place some of them in the shape of a cross on one of their surfaces; and tie the cloth that we mentioned earlier, which is below the tail of the scrotum, tightly with two knots.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	 And then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them tightly so that none of the vessels that nourish those can transmit any cause, to prevent an abscess from occurring here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	 And place another knot as far away from the first knot as three fingers; and then leave these two knots on the cloth that is under the tail of the scrotum the size of a finger, and cut off everything else in a circular shape, and remove it from him.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	 And then incise in the area below the cord of the testicles, through which blood and pus will flow as we have described in what has been said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	 And then administer wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the bandage we have described (and sometimes a white cloth is cauterized, which we mentioned after the incision to prevent bleeding, because often this happens). And let the bandage stay until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	 But if the discharge is delayed, then soak a cloth in hot water and place it on the affected area until it falls off, as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat the wound with another treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	 Chapter 66
De hernia ventosa.	 About Hernias
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	 In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has been bold enough to treat it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	 And the first ones said that it is done in this way, as we have described for the hernia with blood vessels; which is that you lift the vessels near the cut on that side; and then dry in the middle of the spot around the abscess with water that opens it up, until the vessels fall off.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	 And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	 Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	 Of the displacement that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	 Sometimes there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and the area swells up.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	 And do not give any cause to the intestines of the genitals; and if you do, that is little; and it returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	 However, if the time is prolonged with this, there is a deep fissure in the abdomen until the intestines come out of the abdomen; and this happens due to the extension of the abdomen which is in the ankles as we have said, which causes are that the abdomen is extended, and then it becomes softened and the area is swollen and raised.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	 And its treatment is with a pointed instrument as previously described in this account.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	 And sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then dry the area of the swollen rupture with a section according to the length of three times.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	 And then strengthen the white bandage that is under the knee until it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	 And then take the hand and place it on the prominent part of the bandage, and press it against the belly button.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	 And then cut the two prominent ends on the end of the bandage and join one to the other with a stitch.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	 And then remove the end of the bandage, and do not leave any part of it on the body, nor extend the hole, nor cause anything similar as I will explain to you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	 And then treat it as you would with wounds, and when you cut the threads, clean it and restore the wound until it is healed; because the bandage is tightened and the prominence of the tear is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	 Cautery is better in this place, for it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	 Chapter .68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	 Of softening the knot of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	 Often times the knot of the testicles in some men is softened by this, because the flesh between them is softened and it is believed that he will be cured.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	 Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	 And if you want, in the beginning soften the superfluous part with three or four cookings and secure it firmly with a stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	 And then incise between the stitches, and then treat for treatment of other diseases until he is healed and the threads fall out.
Capitol .lxix.	 Chapter 69
De castracio.	 Of Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	 Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but for some reasons it is permitted to me to write about it in this book; and there is no need to mention it except for two reasons: one is so that the doctor knows about it when he is questioned about it, so that he may know how to treat the person to whom it happens; and the other reason is that we sometimes have a need for castration of other animals for our benefit from them, such as with mules, oxen, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	 And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by ligation or by incision and excision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	 But in the case that is done by ligation, the way to do it is to make the animal stand in hot water until its testicles are softened and lengthened and hanging down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	 And then take those with your hand until they are dissolved and do not appear under the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	 In a case of castration done by incision and section, you should hold the animal and press its spermatic cord with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	 And then tie the ligaments, and cut on each testicle with a section until you process two testicles.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	 And then cut those pus that you will have skinned off.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	 Do not leave on the testicles any cause, but place a subtle ligation that is above the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	 And this method of castration is better when done by tightening, because tightening strongly avoids any cause from the testicles so that the animal desires coitus.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 And then care for the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	 Chapter 70
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	 On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	 Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: the first is when it appears as if there is space between the spermatic cord and the testicles, in which there is a figure like a woman's vulva with pubic hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	 And at times from that pain there is urine which is in the cords of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	 But in women it is different: and that is that the vulva of the woman on the pubis is like two testicles of a man, a little smaller at the outer edge, similar to the foreskin of a man, and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	 And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	 And it is necessary that you bind those swollen parts until the swelling subsides, and then treat them with the remedy for other diseases.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	 And in the second kind of men, in which there is urine in the cord of the testicles, there is neither cure nor treatment for him.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	 Of swelling and prominent flesh caused by women's conditions.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	 Mild swelling is treated with natural remedies until it subsides, and care should be taken; and sometimes it becomes more pronounced in some women to the point that it spreads like in men and persists during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	 Therefore, you must hold the excess swelling with your hand or grease and bind it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	 And do not hesitate at the beginning, especially in the region of the anus, so that there will be no flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	 And then cure it with the treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	 But flesh that is born is flesh that comes out from the mother's horror until it fills that, and it exits easily to the outer parts according to its likeness (and for this reason some first called it “tailed illness”); therefore, we should cut it like lint and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	 Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	 On the treatment of anal fissures.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	 Anal fissure is when the woman's anus is not pierced, or it is a small opening.
E es o natural o accidental.	 And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	 Accidental is due to illness that has occurred beforehand, and this can be caused by unsuitable flesh or subtle or thick excrement.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	 And it occurs either in the mother's anus, or on its sides, or on its upper part, or on its lower part, and it is forbidden to have sex, to become pregnant, and to give birth, and it is especially forbidden during menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	 And the recognition of that is done by examining the uterus, if there is prolapse, then it is certain; but if not, then you should search for it with your fingers or with a speculum.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	 But if the prolapse is subtle and close to the two lips, then you cut it and tear it away.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	 And you place powder on both lips, and then you place your index fingers of both hands together on top.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	 And the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread, and then you stretch both lips with force until that subtle prolapse is torn and the prolapse is revealed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	 And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it on the area, and have someone walk on it during the day to ensure that the cut does not heal.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	 But if the prolapse is large and thick, then you should cut it with a lanceolate spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	 But if the prolapse is fleshy, then suspend it with a hook, and cut it off.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	 And have with you the medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as agnus castus, dragon's blood, and henna, mixed with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	 And then administer a wide lead tube so that the wound is not easily closed.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	 And hold it for several days, and then administer some of his blood to drink.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	 And then she should be cured with the other treatment for healing until she is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	 And sometimes it happens during childbirth with the passage of other flesh, and then you should proceed according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	 But if it is due to hardened pus in the mother, do not oppose the pus in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	 Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	 Of the care of hemorrhoids and tail, and red bubo that occurs in the vagina of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	 Hemorrhoids are caused by the openings of many veins, from which blood flows continuously; and old hemorrhoids turn into warts.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	 And I have already said in the division the species of those and their signs, and I say thus: those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	 Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and warts, when they are in the womb of the mother and do not appear to touch, then no treatment should be made for them. ️
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	 "However, those that are in the mother's womb and upon which the child feels, those are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	 "And have the woman sit in cold water and then carefully cut away those [problems] with scissors or with rough cloth, and incise them with razors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	 "And then sprinkle on them the powder from one of the blood-staunching powders without grinding, such as alum and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	 "And then wrap her feet in cloth for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	 "And if the bleeding persists, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rinds, and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	 "And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice with water on the back of [the patient].
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	 "And if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; and if not, apply two cupping glasses, and two leeches to the nipples without scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 "And then take wool and soak it in coriander juice or in parsley juice or in rosemary juice with vinegar, and apply it to the area; and then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	 "However, if the patient is of sharp character, it is necessary for you to ask this: that which appears to you concerning that, according to what I have said above in this language.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "And heal that within so that it may be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	 "Chapter 74
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	 "Concerning the perforation of the esophagus, which occurs in the mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	 "Many types of tumors occur in the mother, such as cancer and lapind-tumors, ulcers, abscesses, erysipelas, fistulas, hemorrhoids, varicose veins, and other tumors.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	 "And I have already mentioned these diseases and the types of those and their signs and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	 "And it is necessary that I speak in this treatise about the cautery which comes from the mother when it is one of the tumors that grow together, and if you want to know in what manner its operation is performed with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	 "Then it is necessary that you consider whether the pain of the tumor at its beginning is sharp with pulsation and inflammation and fever, and if on occasion it reddens and if this sensation strikes it, then do not attempt to perforate it; instead heal it with that which helps in the maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	 And at this point, you should have the woman lie down on a bed that has two beds; and lean back on her heels, align her feet with the part below her belly, expand her thighs, place her arms underneath her knees, and bind each with a bandage suitable for the occasion.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	 And then the midwife should follow from the right side and administer the instrument with which she has opened the mother's orifice, the shape of which will be described in the following cases.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	 And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, you insert it together with the child of the mother into the woman, and the part of the instrument that enters the mother should not be more than the child of the mother and the midwife.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	 But if the instrument is larger than the child of the mother, then it is necessary to place cloths on the surface of the child of the mother so that the entry of any instrument into the child of the mother is prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	 And it is necessary that you place the tip of the instrument on the left side above and that the midwife holding the instrument turns the tip until she has opened the mother's orifice.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	 And when the swelling appears and is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then it is necessary that you dry that part of his head with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	 And when the pus is evacuated, then you should place a cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil with some astringent on the wound; and put pressure on it with a larger bandage.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	 And place outside the bandage, over the wound, clean wool soaked in water where there are boiled mallows.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 And let it be treated for about two days with an ointment which you should apply until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	 And sometimes the bandage and the wound are washed so that it is anointed with water and honey, and then with water in which there is cooked lily root or long-leafed orris, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	 And if the wound is hidden within the swollen bandage, then it is necessary that you refrain from treating him with iron, but rather care for him with water as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	 Chapter 75
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	 To teach midwives how to treat pregnant women when the fetus is in an abnormal position, according to the figure of nature.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	 Here's the translation for the given sentence:
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	 When you see these signs, it is necessary to press the belly so that the embryo descends gently because when they descend onto their head, give them the second birth and cleanse them of those excesses with a good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	 However, that which occurs in this way is unnatural and blameworthy, for when the embryo comes out with its feet first and the body protrudes before the head and the feet, or one hand is by the foot, or the head comes out with one hand next to it, or on the belly, and it quickly turns onto its neck, and it resembles unflattering figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	 Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and discerning in all these matters, and to guard against mistakes and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	 And I am showing you all the figures of these, and what sign is in them, so that it may be signified by this and has been established thus.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	 When the child comes out with its head first in a natural way, and that is very difficult for the woman, and her strength is already weakened, then do this: or let the women have it, and vaporize his womb with cooked fenugreek and moistened oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	 And then insert the instrument between its small spatula and use it to make a cut with the second part of the tool, or slice it open with your nail until the moisture within it is released.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	 And press the woman's abdomen until she delivers the baby.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	 But if it does not deliver, then it is necessary that the woman be anointed with a mixture of flaxseed and fenugreek oil, combined with vinegar.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	 And then command her, and have her anointed, that she be squeezed and made to sneeze with conditions; and cover her mouth and nose for one hour, because the baby will soon come out.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	 And if both hands of the child have already been delivered at first, then it is necessary that you push them back gently little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	 But if it does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on her knees and raise her feet behind her, and then rock the knees back and forth on the ground; and make sure the woman is held so that she does not fall due to the shaking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	 And if the hands are not turned back and the child dies, then cut them off and extract the remaining parts of the child or tie its body to its hand with cloth and pull it out evenly, because that will soon come out.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	 About the emergence of the fetus from its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	 When the baby emerges from its feet, you should then pull it towards yourself, and then turn the baby around, and then envelop it, and then take one of its feet and gently extend it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	 But as it emerges into the birth canal, you should then command it to push, and make it cough with gentle persuasion, because it will soon be born if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	 And if it is not born with the above-mentioned method, then you should return the baby little by little until you place it according to its natural position, because it will then be born with easy delivery.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	 And if it is hindered by all that we have mentioned, then take of alum and dissolved gum, and pound it well in the mortar, and then apply it with water to the woman's vulva, the lowest part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	 And then make her sit in lukewarm water until she reaches the hips.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	 And when you see that the separated parts are softened, then make a fumigation of myrtle for him and apply it to him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	 And when you perform sublimation for an hour, then make the person sit on a chair, and then cause them to sneeze and expel mucus from their mouth, and collect it, and press gently on the lower part of their abdomen with light compression, because this will quickly expel the phlegm.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	 Similarly, make the person lie down on his back and place their hands on it.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	 When the person expels in this manner, then gradually interlace their fingers; and then let the woman sit on her heels, with her feet hanging down, and these should be resting on the ground, and she should keep her hands clasped together.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	 Then gently press on the lower part of their abdomen, and then extract what is between their feet through the anus until it reaches the lowest part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	 And if the person has not expelled [it], then take their feet and move them vigorously, and then gently press on what is above the hip bones until the matter reaches the parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	 Then interlace their fingers and gently draw out the matter, and command the woman to keep pressing until the matter is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	 Based on the pattern you've provided, here's a translation attempt for the new sentence:
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	 Certainly! Here is a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	 And if he cannot walk, then lay him down on his bed, and shake his limbs with great force, and immediately administer leeches which I have recommended for mucilage.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	 And if labor has begun, then lay her down on the bed, and observe the contractions of her belly, guide the baby according to its natural position, make the woman sneeze, and tell her to push until delivery is complete.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	 Immediately after birth, spread out the baby's arms and place him on his back atop his mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	 The midwife should hold the baby's hand and gently turn it until it comes out easily.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	 And when he is born and has been guided, then place on his chest that which we have recommended of oil and mucilage.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	 Then command her to nurse the baby little by little, and when she has done this, lay her down on a bed and command her to lean over her right side, then command her to push; and make her sneeze with intensity.  (The text seems to be describing efforts to deliver the placenta.)
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	 The expulsion of the fetus is prepared on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	 When they are suffering from a horrible pain according to this method, consider it, and then you should cut the second skin with your nail until it is drained of its moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	 And if the feet are swollen on his face and neck, then you should cut that part of the navel, so that it is not retained and he may recover.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	 Then you should remove the skin to the inner parts until you place that which is necessary, and order the woman to press on herself several times, and the humors will be expelled with ease, God willing.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	 Premature birth of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	 Know that twins are born after many watchings, and sometimes three or four are born at once, but this is strange and rare; there are two causes for this: nature, and not life.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And count those, whether they are multiplied, with one second skin, and they are separated by the navel, distinguishing these between the ligaments in the navel of each of them. And sometimes they come out like this as if it were a fetus by easy natural exit, and sometimes they come out by an impossible exit as we have said.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	 And if some are difficult during childbirth and they reach the stage we mentioned about unnatural figures, then you should care for them as we have described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	 And if the midwife is skilled and does what she does with ease and skill, and with care, and acts according to every figure as she has been prepared by her intellect to bring about health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	 The memory of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarries.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	 Sometimes in the mother one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, even ten are formed, and it has already been verified that a woman has aborted or given birth to six, and another ten, all formed, which was done by the measure of the glorious wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	 And all this must be in the knowledge of the midwife, for she knows well that appearance, and therefore she should act accordingly.
Capitol .lxxvi.	 Chapter 76
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	 Of the removal of the child when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	 When you care for the dead child as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not yet issued forth, and you are forced to use manual operation, then you must consider if the woman is of sound virtue and is not with any of the accidents by which her loss is feared.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	 Based on the pattern and similarities with known Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation attempt:
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	 And let the attendant hold that [part] of two parts or bind it in linen cloth so that his body does not extend beyond the removal of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	 And then you moisturize the mother's mouth with oils, honey, and a mixture of althea, fenugreek, and linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	 And then anoint the midwife's hands with those oils and mixtures. Then gently insert her hand into the mother, and then seek with her hand the place where the fingernails rest on the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	 And in this case: then consider if the fetus is ready to come out headfirst. Then place your fingernails in its heel, neck, mouth, palate, below the chin, or in the nearby ribs, or beneath the hypochondrium.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	 But if the descent is breech-first, then in the heel or the midpoint of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	 And it is necessary to hold the nail with your right hand and place its curvature in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, then gently insert the hand until you reach the navel.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	 And then place and keep in the position of the patient another cushion, or a third if necessary, to ensure that it is not too tight, but rather extended according to their right size only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	 And let it be raised on all sides, so that the removal of it may be eased in the same way as is done with a tooth when it is extracted.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	 It is necessary that there be something between them to soften the extension; and if any part of it is held back, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and carefully insert them and turn with those things which are held back.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	 Therefore, if the part of the baby is forgotten, then the fingers should be changed to a place that is more advanced; and do this until all of the baby is born.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	 However, if the hand is pushed forward before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the narrowness of the birth canal, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and then pull that hand out until all of it has been born, and cut it either at the wrist or at the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	 And you must do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence:
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	 Based on the pattern you've provided, here's the translation of the given sentence:
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	 And if the head is swollen and constrained, you should cut the throat so that the moisture in the feet is drained out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	 But if it is not complicated and does not obey swelling, then you should cut the head as soon as possible according to your ability.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	 And if there are abscesses or dropsy in the stomach, then you should pierce it so that the moisture within can flow out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	 But if the stomach is on its feet, then its attraction will be light and its direction towards the mother's mouth will also be light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	 But if the stomach and feet are constricted, then you should extract it using a cloth wrapped around your hand, and cut open the stomach and feet so that the liquid within can flow out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	 But if the other members are removed and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, she should insert her hand into the air pocket, search for the head with it, and draw it towards the mother's mouth using the aforementioned words. Then she should insert one or two fingers into it and draw it out using those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	 And administer plasters; and follow with waters that soften and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	 And if the abscess is on the side, if possible it should be lanced; and administer the water that we mentioned for the live abscess.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	 And if this is not possible, then it should be incised in pieces, and removed.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	 And you must ensure that no cause remains inside the second one.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	 And when you have completed all your operations, then administer the water that we have mentioned for the treatment of abscesses that occur from the mother one.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	 And if there is a flow of blood, then dissolve in styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	 And I have seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and on top of that another living one implanted, and then the other fetus also died.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	 It happened to him that he had a long-standing abscess in his navel; and it swelled inside until it burst open, and began to push out arms.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	 And I was called to care for him, and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	 When you notice any swelling on the patient's abdomen due to certain causes, apply a strong adhesive plaster. And then I extracted a bone from him, and after some days passed, I extracted another bone; and I was greatly astonished, for there are no bones in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	 And so I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	 Therefore, I investigated the wound and extracted many bones from her, the woman being in her thousandth month of pregnancy, and she lived in this manner for a long time; a small piece of arm came out of her.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	 And I did not consider this strange, because there is science and help in this, which the physician can achieve with his hand for treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	 About the shapes of the instruments needed to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	 The shape of the vertex with which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	 This is the shape of a dilator with which the lips are cut, at whose cutting there are two vertices in the two ends of two foetuses.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	 However, this vertex should be more subtle and narrower, and it should be made either of ivory or boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	 And let the width of each pole be two fingers and the margin of each also two fingers, and the length of each is one and a half palms; and in the middle of two poles there are two fastenings of this same pole which are already secured, whose length is slightly more than half a palm, and the width of each is about two fingers or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	 And these two additional items should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that she is opened with them when you rotate the two prescribed fingers.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	 Another similar form, but more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	 It should be made of ebony or boxwood according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	 However, at the end of it are two additional items as you see, and the length of these additions is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	 And when you want to open the mother with them, then make the woman sit on the bed with her feet hanging over, and open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	 Then open your hand with the instrument in the same way as you do with forceps, according to the quantity you want of the approximation of the mother's mouth until the midwife does what she wants.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	 The form of a whirlwind, which the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	 The form of a driving wind with which the child is delivered.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	 The form of friendship, in which the head is enlarged.  This translation seems to be based on the assumption that "amisidat" is a typo for "ampliatat," meaning "enlargement." If "amisidat" is intended to mean something else, please provide more context so I can give a more accurate translation.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	 Based on the context provided and the similarities to medieval medical texts, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Forma de amesidat pauc:	 Here is my best attempt at translating the given line into English based on the context provided:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	 Here's a translation of the first line:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	 "There are two methods of using unguents:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	 "A method of forceps, which has teeth made of horn to hold the head of the child.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	 "A method using a spatula with two ends, used to cut the head (off).
Forma de dos espatums latz:	 "Another method using two wide spatulas.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	 "All these instruments having been exercised, and when more varieties of them are prepared by the craftsmen, the operation becomes easier and more men are needed.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	 "And do not neglect to have these instruments ready, wherever you may be, because the need for them cannot be avoided.
De extraccio de la segondina.	 "About the removal of the placenta.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	 "When the placenta is retained after delivery, then you should command the woman to hold her breath, and make her sneeze by tickling, and strengthen your hand over her mouth and nose, and if it comes out this way, good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	 "And if not, then you take a bowl and make a hole in the cover, and place on it burning herbs like calamint, rue, dittany, chamomile, safflower, cinnamon bark, and centaury.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	 All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the pot, and place it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	 Then place a tube of reed in the mouth of the patient and hold it until the vapor reaches the cavity of the patient's mouth.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	 Then make the patient sneeze as we have said, and the second night will be gone quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	 But if this treatment persists and does not leave, then you should order the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or a mixture of althea, and then insert it into the vagina and search for the second night with it. When you have found it, then take it out little by little. But if it is attached to the child, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the second night, extract it little by little, straightening it so that the woman does not suffer from a strong contraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	 It is important for the right and left ribs to be loosened easily.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	 Then adjust it according to the amount of contraction, because she will obey and remove herself from attachment.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	 And if the mother's mouth is tightly closed, we have already recommended the treatment with suffocation and with medication of the olive oil with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	 But if it is not treated with all the causes we have recommended, then be careful not to do anything on that in repetition of abstraction, but rather it is necessary that what comes out of him goes into the mother's mouth, and then you should immediately treat that with ointment and tetrapharmakon; for that will cause it to rot quickly within a few days, and it will be dissolved and forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	 But when it rots, an evil smell rises to the head and stomach, which harms the patient; then it is necessary that appropriate fumigations be administered for this purpose.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	 But some of the Ancients have already tested a fumigation of juniper berries and dry figs for this purpose.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	 Form of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated for the retention of menstruation and the second birth.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	 It should be made of glass or tin.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	 And the thin end should be placed in the womb and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed on the coals of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	 "And make sure that one is completely consumed before starting another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	 "For the treatment of an unperforated infant's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 "When a baby is born and his anus is not yet perforated, which has already been carefully checked and verified.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	 "Then the midwife should perforate it with her finger, and if not, use a sharp probe, being careful not to touch the sphincter.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	 "Then place wool soaked in oil and vinegar over it; and then treat it with an ointment until it heals.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	 "But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a catheter in the orifice for several days, and remove it when the infant wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	 "And if the obstruction of the anus is due to the consolidation of a wound or an abscess; then that consolidation must be cut open, and then it should be treated with the water we have mentioned for the treatment of lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	 "For the treatment of fistulas that occur under the anus.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	 "Fistulas that occur in the lower part under the anus are known as growths, which occur near the outside of the anus or in the space between two parts.
E es una fistula o motas.	 And it is a fistula or fissure.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	 And with that knot being old and running from the watery white humor or subtle pus, some of these fistulas are penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	 And these penetrating ones are known by what comes out of them through the exit and windiness; sometimes the patient experiences an exit, and it is easily exited from them, worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	 And some of these fistulas sometimes penetrate into the space and enter the bladder, and into the root of the penis; and some of these penetrating ones enter the joint of the thigh and into the bone of the hip.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	 And this is how a penetrating fistula entering the anus and non-penetrating is known: you place your finger inside the anus, and introduce thin wire of iron or lead into the fistula when it is not obstructed.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	 But if there is an obstruction in it, then introduce into it thin wire of lead or horse hair until you feel the wire or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	 And if you do not feel that at all and there is no trace of exit, either of worms or windiness, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and so proceed to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	 And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the penis, then its significance is the discharge of urine from it and the prohibition that the place be healed with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	 But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and there is pain in the area, then the sign of it is that the tent [or inflammation] spreads to this place if there is not a fracture in the bone, and there is pain in the surrounding part; and from it always comes pus; and that medicine has no effect in that place, nor is it healed with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	 And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure for everything, and the cure for them is the labor and futility of those doctors who are determined [to try].
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	 But in those that are not penetrating and not chronic, healing with iron is expected, as I will tell you, and this which I have already proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	 And have the patient lie between your hands on his back and raise his thighs between them, the hips be inclined to his belly, and then introduce a probe of lead or iron if there is a fracture in the fistula, until you know where the inflammation spreads.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	 And if that [situation] is felt by the patient around the neck, then you should insert your finger into the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if you feel in your finger that the tent is already penetrating on its own, or if you feel something between your finger and that [tent], then know for certain that it has penetrated; and at that point do not work on it, because there is no cure in it, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	 Nevertheless, some people say that it can be cured later in certain men.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	 And of the treatment by which healing is hoped for in him, it is that you should prepare a fine, subtle cautery iron according to the width of the fistula, as has been mentioned before, and insert that heated iron into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those fibrous tissues resembling bird quills are completely adjusted.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	 And then wrap that [area] with clean cloths until all the adjusted tissues are healed, and then treat it with medicines that promote the growth and hardening of the flesh. If it is healed, good; and if not, then it cannot be cured at any time by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	 And then clean those fistulated flesh parts that resemble the quill of a feather, making sure none are left behind for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	 But if blood flow occurs between you and the operation when inspecting those parts of the flesh, then use a light instrument to cauterize with fire or sharp medicine. Cauterizing with fire has two good properties: it adheres the flesh together and it dries up the humors by stopping the bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	 And then wrap that wound with clean cloths or fine wool until it reaches the arm, and then heal the wound with hardening ointments to promote healing and strengthening of the flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	 And these medicines that have astringent and drying properties; when it has been restored, it is already healed and you need not fear a recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	 But if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectum and extends to the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and explore with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	 And therefore, if you find the opening and there is only a thin layer of skin or flesh between it and the rectum, then do not operate on it directly but rather use an indirect method through trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	 The text seems to be discussing different methods for treating a wound in the rectal area:
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	 And sometimes the fistula is finished in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the buttocks around the surface of the body with the cord and on the edge of the buttocks, then take a perforated tip probe, which is like a needle for preparing the hearts in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	 And insert it into that thread wrapped in five threads or around them; and then insert the probe with thread into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	 But if it penetrates into the edge of the buttocks very deeply, then you extract the thread from that hole such that you insert your finger into the anus; and you pull out the end of the thread and join the two ends together, and tighten each one, and let it stay for a day or two. And when you have drawn the thread more into the flesh, tighten well until those flesh parts between the two ends of the thread are cut and fall off.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	 Then care for the wound until it is healed and cured.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	 But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrated, then make it penetrate, in whatever manner you have prepared, until it is well within the flesh, for you should not do this yourself to avoid cutting the skin; and then continue with that until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	 The form of the pointed spatula used to split the fistula: the tip is very sharp and the other end is blunt, so that you do not insert what is unnecessary, as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	 The stitching of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	 Hemorrhoids are found in two forms, either appearing within the rectum like coals, or those that protrude as if covered with fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	 And these are small and large, and blood flows from them always or sometimes, and they can be many, and they may protrude outside the rectum, and at its ends.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	 However, those that protrude outside the rectum are of a different nature due to less moisture, from which flows citron-colored water or a little blood with continuous pus, and they are distinguished by their color.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	 And the treatment for those inside the rectum is to instruct the patient to sit and to express until the rectum protrudes and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	 Then cut and suspend with scissors what you have grasped with your fingernail, and then incise those according to their root.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	 This text appears to be discussing the treatment of ingrown nails. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 And then care for those with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	 And if the feces do not come out easily, then make the patient fast with a clyster that has a small opening, and let it be washed with water from the colon so that it comes out easily when the patient is pressed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	 However, if the hemorrhoids are protruding from the anus, then the cause of them is easy to treat. You should take hold of them with your fingernail or with tweezers, and cauterize them. Then care for them with the previously mentioned water until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	 And for those whom you have cauterized, it is necessary that you administer sutures to them in this manner: Take some thread and wrap it around the needle, then pull out the hemorrhoids to the part above. Make the needle penetrate into the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the part below the needle, and tie them lengthwise; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong traction, and then knot the thread and remove the needle.  (This passage seems to describe a technique for tying off hemorrhoids after cauterization.)
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	 And do this for all (affected areas), and leave one of them open, so that the excess blood can drain from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	 Then place a cloth infused with rose oil or cerate over the affected area, and place it on the wound, instructing the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And leave that open until it heals; and when it is healed, treat those areas with ointment or another remedy until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	 Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 Many are caused by dryness of the wound or constriction due to natural causes.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 And when they are old and this medicine does not work, then you should scrape them with the point of a spatula or your nail until they become moist, and remove the scab that forms on top, which prevents healing; and then treat them until they heal.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 Then you should remove them with a strong and violent purgative, as soon as they start to bleed and become raw; and then treat them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	 Of the treatment of leprosy, which is called "lepra.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	 Know that leprosy, which is called "lepra," appears as red or dark patches on the skin resembling a caper fruit, and it appears all over the body but more commonly in the areas below the feet and hands, and through these you will know its pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	 And then it is necessary to cut what is around the nail, and it should be held with forceps or tweezers, and then it should be removed from its root; and then care for that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	 And if you wish, cauterize the part following what has been said in the previous chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	 However, a wart is a small, rough, round projection on the surface of the body, and many are seen in children's hands.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	 And its treatment is that you stretch and cut it, or compress it with iron or wool into which vinegar can be inserted.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	 And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	 And the warts are already removed, both inverted and non-inverted, with the instrument I mentioned earlier.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	 However, a mole is a small, hairy or large, rough projection on the surface of the body, often appearing on the forehead, and when cold touches it, it feels like an insect bite, and it occurs around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	 And its treatment is to take a quill of the goose or vulture feather, and it should be strong, and place it on the mole so that the circle of the quill encompasses the edges of it; and then revolve your hand with the quill until you cut what is around the mole, and place it on the forehead of the flesh, and remove the mole from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	 If you wish, do this with a needle of reed or iron in the following manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	 Let the opening at the top of the needle be fine and not perforated, wrapped in such a way that the grasp of the said part is facilitated and its rotation is enabled.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	 And if you wish, cauterize according to what was previously stated in the chapter on burning with a hot iron.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	 Regarding the shape of the instruments used for surgery.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	 Sometimes surgery is performed with silver or bronze instruments, which are cast or hammered; and sometimes these instruments are made small or large according to the needs of the patient, because those used for treating young children should be small, and for patients whose anus is tight or painful, the instruments should also be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	 The shape of a large and few surgical instruments:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	 The tip of the needle, at the top where the bag is tied, should be wide in this manner; and there should be a distinct point where the bag is tied, as you can see.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	 And the end that goes into the anus should be blunt (i.e., not open) like a lion's tooth, thin at the base; and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays and slightly larger.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	 And let there be a bag in which the medications of the animal bladder or sheep wool are placed, and its size should be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	 And let it be pierced by three openings as if it were rolled up; and the space between the openings should be the thickness of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	 And then insert into those openings strong threads of raw thread, which are from these threads or wrap around them; and attach the bag to them; and when the bag is attached to it, tighten it at the tip of the crosspiece between two distinguishing marks with a strong constriction, and then tie each opening: However, the method of tying is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the patient's tolerance level; and ensure that it is not too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	 And then have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs up and place a stool or bench under them; and then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; and then insert it into the rectum gently, and then have the assistant take the bag and squeeze it with two hands and forcefully until everything in the crosspiece is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the crosspiece and have the patient raise their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	 And if the medicine forces that person to excrete, let them do so as much as they can; and if they sleep with it for an entire night, it is more effective in helping.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	 But if you treat that person for abdominal pains and their excretion is cut off, then you should continue to apply the cautery until they are healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	 And if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the anus, then let it be cauterized with a very subtle and clean iron, like those used for treating children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	 Of the treatment of plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	 I have already mentioned in the division of the treatment of plagues what is appropriate for this book, and now I will describe the treatment of them using both hands and medicines according to their nature.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	 Therefore, I say that plagues are diversified according to what causes them and the location upon which they fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	 And the causes by which plagues are often made are such as the throwing of a stone, or cutting with a sword or knife, or striking with a spear, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to these many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	 "But the diseases that are in the places of the body are like the disease that strikes the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the back, and similarly to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	 "And I am recommending the treatment for some diseases so that you may follow this reasoning and rule for other diseases as well.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	 "And I will begin with the simple diseases of the head, because the memory of the complex ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	 "Therefore, I say that when a simple disease occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a stone or something similar, and the skin has only been broken slightly but it is a large wound and you fear an abscess may form on that patient, then cut and make an incision on the cephalic vein immediately, and do not delay this; and extract from him as much blood as according to his strength, unless there is some reason prohibiting phlebotomy, especially if the blood coming out of the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	 "And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the affected part; and watch over the patient to prevent repletion and from eating heavy food.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	 If there is any reason to prevent indulgence, then reduce food intake and avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	 Place a compress on the wound. If an abscess forms, incise it and let the pus out, then apply oil of roses or wine that has been boiled down to a syrup.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	 But if you are sure that the abscess has been properly incised, then place a compress on the wound. If it is recent and the blood and air have not changed it yet, then apply a small amount of the powder I will tell you about next.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	 And if the air has already changed it, then place a compress with some ointment on it until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	 But if the wound is large or deep and the lips of it are not close together, then bring them together with stitches as I will tell you about the stitching technique next.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	 But if the wound is exposed to bone and marrow, and there is no retention but only a small membrane, then incise it and immediately treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its proper place with stitches, and instruct the patient to abstain from foods that are tough or have hard kernels or similar things until it heals. 》
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	 And if you find putrefaction in the intestine and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut out all that is rotten and discard it, and subsequently cure it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	 However, if there is an artery or vein from which blood could flow in these wounds, and it has not been severed by medicine, then you should inquire about the vessel. And if you find that it is not cut, then you should cut it with a scalpel or tie it off; and if necessity compels you to do otherwise than what we have said, then you should cauterize until the blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	 If these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is light; so you should sprinkle this powder over them, for it will heal them before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	 And the manner of making the powder is this: take one part of sesame oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unslaked lime; all must be finely ground and sifted, and with it the wound should be filled, and it should be bound tightly until it adheres well to it, and coagulates with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	 And then bind it above with bandages and leave it like that, and do not unbind it while it is in this state, lest the medicine be drained from it before it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	 And sometimes this alone cures, when you do not have present any herbs or dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	 And perform this same operation on large wounds when it is necessary to place something over them and tighten it, and these are recent wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 And if the air has altered them, especially in the summer, then it is not advisable to use this powder. Instead, cure those wounds with the water we have mentioned, so that you place digestive ointments on them, or place flour of barley mixed with water and honey on them until they form a scab; and then cure them with the other remedy until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	 But if there is a bone fracture in the wound, and it is small, then extract it with tweezers.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	 And I will describe the treatment of skull fractures as follows:
De las plaguas del col.	 Of neck wounds.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	 Here's my line-by-line translation of the given text:
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	 "And do not apply any cause of cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold and its continuation is with the brain, which is the coldest of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	 "And if it is treated with light medicines, such as being washed with warm water, sometimes infused with rose oil or non-rose oil, and rinsed when washed with warm water and the other stones diminishing in this manner, and moist ointments.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	 "But if the wound is large, then administer stitching, or trim its edges, and afterwards treat it with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	 "But if the wound has depth or occurs in it with lower gangrene, then pierce that place where it is most depressed.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	 "But if an artery is cut in the wound and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry it, or tie it off, or cauterize it if necessary.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	 "But if the jugular vein or any of its tributaries has been cut and the neck's veins are saved, then bring together the lips of the wound with a suture over the pipe of the jugular and do not touch it; rather smooth it out and restore it to its natural shape, and strengthen it with a proper bandage, and leave it for some days; and afterwards treat it with ointments that contain astringents and stimulants until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	 Based on the provided pattern and the sentence you've given, here's my attempt at translation:
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	 And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle powder over it, as recommended for you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	 But if in the wound a fistula has formed, then cure it with water of which the memory will come to you soon in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	 Of wounds of the neck or similar, when made between the shoulders and is made with a spear or with a knife or with a lance or similarly.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	 If it is a strike by lance or knife, and you see its depth, then consider more if there is air coming from the wound when the patient exhales; then know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	 And if there is no depth and the wound is recent with its blood, then in the first hour you put powder on it, and do not stretch it so that the blood is not retained in its depth and does not return to the heart and makes the patient worse; but put on it attractive ointment, and dissolve that two times a day.  >
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	 And if the ointment is not at hand, then you put in the opening of the wound cotton wool so that it sucks up the moisture from the humors; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that the water which is retained in it runs out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	 And if the wound is caused by a cut from a knife or sword, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then cure it with water that has been previously used for stitching, if it is large; or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	 But if the wound has already affected the bone and some of the cut pieces have fallen inside, then turn the wound and try to extract those pieces, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	 But if they are not separate, then leave them inside so that the wound can heal, which will make their removal easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	 And for other wounds occurring in other parts of the body, the treatment is the same as we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	 Of the wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	 The condition that occurs in the abdomen can be great, small, or intermediate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	 In the case of a large condition, some times the intestine or nerves of the intestine are affected because their intrusion and subsequent suture must be done with greater vigor and skill.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	 A small rupture is difficult by another means, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult if you do not immediately undertake the intrusion of them to their place, because it swells and becomes thickened so that the entry into it becomes difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	 And therefore, the best solution is surgery because in this procedure, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, unlike the two previously mentioned methods.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	 And know that the suture of the belly is done in four ways, but there are two common sutures that are also suitable for other body wounds.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	 And the other two sutures are common to other wounds, but they are particularly suitable for belly suturing.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	 And I will explain each one to you with an explanation and description.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	 Therefore, I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause for the intestine through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the incision as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	 And therefore when this is the case, it is necessary that you scratch it in such a way that you submerge a sponge or cloth soaked in warm water alone, or you should cook in hot water, hyssop, cumin, and cloves with that, so that the intestine enters until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	 And sometimes this is done with a herb that has astringent properties, and it is better than water alone in reducing the swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	 And so when you see the swelling being resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which there is althea and mallow, because by this it is relieved of its suffering with little effort.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	 But if the intestine of the patient has been removed, then apply this treatment: cut the rupture slightly with an instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	 And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate and not done as a section, so that there will be no need to dry or deplete.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	 Concerning the instrument, see its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	 One part of it should be sharp and curved, the other part not sharp, with a fine tip that is not as thin as a spatula, but rather blunt at the end.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	 And so when the wound is widened and the intestine comes out, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible on water, because it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	 But when the rupture is large and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should elevate the head and feet of the patient higher than the middle parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	 And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always place your attention and consideration on this matter so that the part where the injury is located is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	 And thus you should administer (treatment) in both large and small wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	 And in small wounds, place what is prepared for this purpose, and then make sure that the one who will administer the treatment is between your feet, holding the entire disruption with his hand and aligning its edges, and then discover if there is any reason to use another suture.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	 And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle or count the number of needles according to the width of the wound; then pass the end of the disruption through the little finger, and tighten the thread with one, making sure not to tie knots at both ends of the thread. Hold the ends of the thread between your fingers so that they penetrate that part; and after adding two ends of the thread and two ends of the needle, you will have made four stitches.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	 And then strengthen with a double thread around the circumference of the needle, and sometimes even from two parts together, and then attach the two lips of the wound in a decent way; and then pass the thickness of the finger and put another needle there, and then tie that one with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary with the needles until you have completed all the tightening of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	 And let the needles be of moderate size between coarseness and delicacy, for delicate needles cut the flesh very easily; and coarse ones are difficult to enter into the vein, and therefore they should be of moderate size in both delicacy and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	 And it should not be that the needle is placed at both ends of the vein too closely, so that the flesh is not cut easily and the wound does not open before its healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	 And do not prolong the stitches so that the wound is not hindered from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	 And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient during their sleep; and place over the stitches bandages spread out on all sides, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave those in place until you know that the wound has already healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	 And these kinds of stitches with needles in any manner are more suitable for small wounds, because even in their stitching one or two needles or around that.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	 But the second kind of stitch is common: and it is that you should administer the four extremities - two of the thread and two of the needle - in one go, with a needle on which the thread is wrapped thinly and evenly.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	 And then when with the needle you have penetrated these four extremities, return the needle from that same side from which it began, so that the thread can be drawn from a higher part of the wound, so that the stitch is like sewing cloth, with which the cloths are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	 And place between each stitch the width of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	 And this stitch is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	 And with such stitch I sewed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been cut by a knife, and the opening of the wound was more than a palm, and about two palms of intestines were around the middle part, and the opening was in the middle of the limb; and then I returned what was protruding from the wound after twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	 And the wound was healed within fifteen days or thereabouts, and he was cured and made well; and then he lived for many years after, and returned to his normal activities.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	 And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle it happened, because I did not cure him with an ointment, since it was in a place where no ointment or any medicine could be found, but I placed on the wound cotton soaked twice a day and frequent washing with honey water until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	 But I will describe two types of sutures according to the narrative of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	 And it is that you begin with the suture of the bowel, and insert the needle from the outside to the inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	 And thus when the needle penetrates the bowel and in that same stitch straightens and runs the length of the entire body, and leaves the end of the thread where you inserted the needle; then make the needle penetrate from inside to outside on the other end of the suture.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	 And thus when you have made that penetration, then you make that penetration again in the same end of the suture from outside to inside; and leave the end of the thread which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate on the other end from inside to outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	 And use that (tool/instrument) with which you make the penetration into the body at the extreme end of the mirror, so that everything inside it is fully penetrated.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	 Then begin from this side of the body and insert (the needle) with the end that is on one side, and draw out the needle from the thread which penetrates, and then return it to that thread and bring the end of the needle which is on the other side towards this extremity of the mirror; and draw out that (needle) from the thread which is on the patient's side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	 And do this once and again, and do it once more until you sew everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	 And the summary of this method of suturing is that you sew with a suture of silk with which you sew the hairs, so that you sew the body once from the end of the thread, and leave that other (end) until it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	 But the second type of suture, which is also called "Gualia", and which is proper to him and recommended by him, is that you sew it in such a way that some doctors sew it, so that they bring all the divided parts to their corresponding parts according to nature; and apply one end of (the thread) and the end of the mirror to the other end of (the thread), and this is done as I have recommended to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	 Here's the translation of the first source sentence:
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	 And then rotate each of these, and make each one penetrate from the inner side to the outer side in two opposite directions of the limb, except for those that are on the contrary side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	 And this manner of stitching is better than common light stitching, and it is the stitching that was previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	 This is the discourse of Galen
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	 And others may tell you that suture of the abdomen is performed with two needles; therefore, you should insert a thread into each of these needles, and begin by introducing the needle from the side where you are, and make it penetrate to the other side according to the stitching of those who sew the intestines equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	 And know that when a rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, then its suture is more difficult than in other places of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	 But the treatment of this wound is also the treatment for other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	 Which is because when you obtain the recent wound with its blood before the air alters it, and return the intestines and sew it and prepare it properly, then place over it a powder that promotes healing.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 And if the air has already altered the wound, then place on that wound ointments which are at your disposal until they turn into hard stones and close the wounds, and ensure they are healed and watched; then care for it in the same way as you would with other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	 However, if the medicines are not at your disposal, then place on it immediately, as soon as it begins to bleed, a cloth of wool or cotton, and change it twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because for simple wounds you do not need any other medicine.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	 However, if you fear that the wound may spread to the main members, then it is necessary for you to immerse a piece of wool in oil of good quality or in rosemary oil, and place it around the area between the armpits and under the shoulders.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	 And if there is pain or putrefaction in his intestines, because this happens several times, then cauterize that with black henbane juice, especially if the putrefaction has reached the intestine and made a penetrating exit into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	 And know that the one which is of the large intestine is of easier healing than the one which is in the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	 And it is of difficult healing because the intestine which is called "jejunum" does not heal from any wound that falls upon it; and this is due to the great number of veins in it, and their magnitude within it, and the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	 However, if the wound proceeds from a foreign body, and you obtain it while fresh, reduce it according to your judgment with which you also reduce the intestines in the same manner.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	 However, if it has passed into the space and has already turned green or black, then strengthen that with oil over the discolored area, so that blood flow comes out, because in the foreign body there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	 And then incise that which is another ligament, and place two ends of the oil dependent from the part below the wound, so that you may have relief on yourself for the attraction of it and the fall of the foreign body and the emission of the arm of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	 "Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	 "When a disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible for it to be restored in some men, because I have seen that one who was wounded in his belly with the stroke of a lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had formed a fistula, and thus air and wind came out from him.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	 "Then I pursued the cure of him already, since he was not finished in his healing, but rather I continued to refine it until the inside is healed and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	 "And I, seeing the place already consolidated, informed the patient that he might encounter an adverse event in his belly; and he did not meet with any bad event, but rather returned to his usual habits of eating and drinking, and then he entered a bath and was exercised in his words.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	 "And some experienced ones say that when a wound occurs in the intestine, and it is small, then it should be tied like this: that you take ants with large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those ants on the two lips of the wound with its mouth open; thus when it takes hold of them and strengthens its mouth, cut off its head, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	 And you should place another ant near the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants, placing one after another according to the size of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	 And you should sew up that and the wound; and let those attached heads remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	 And it is possible that the intestine be bound with fine suture made from the intestine of an animal attached to it, since it is more needle-like; and you should take the end of this intestinal thread, and ensure it is very thin, and then bind the end of it with a thread, wrapped around it, and then insert that thread into needles and sew up the intestine with it, and reduce it in the rupture.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	 And this method of suturing with ants is nothing but a way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	 However, if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, for then it is not only a slight tear, but it will not heal completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	 On the treatment of pustules and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	 Sure, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	 And fistula according to truth is a nodular ulcer, hard, white, without pain, and with which there is an indentation like the indentation of a bird's feather; and because of this it is named alocus risatus, that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	 And in some men it is moist, which causes the arm to be weak; and quickly after the moisture has been removed, within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	 And sometimes this moisture is found, and it is small, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	 And I have already said in the division, when I spoke of wounds, that every ulcer which is not healed or does not have bare flesh, this is not because of one thing but for one of these nine reasons: one reason being either due to lack of blood in the body; or because it has become corrupt; or because between it and the lips there is hard flesh preventing the growth of new flesh; or because it is caused by excessive dryness; or because that ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter around it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used for its treatment is unsuitable; or when corruption settles in the region, and it becomes pestilent; or due to the nature of the region, as is the case in Zaragoza, where digestion of wounds is difficult and slow in healing abscesses by nature; or because there is a bone, or multiple bones within it.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	 And it is important for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas, which are created through surgical intervention with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	 And know that fistulas can occur in all the parts of the body; for some of them lead to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or to the intestines, or the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the joints composed like those of the hand and foot; and among these are those that affect a main part and its neighbors.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	 Therefore, among these fistulas, the one that follows this manner is difficult to heal and does not respond to treatment, and with it comes work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	 And if there is any of these fistulas whose depth does not reach these places that have been mentioned, and you expect and hope for its cure, and you wish to gain knowledge about it, then take a probe of iron or silver, and if the fistula follows a straight path, examine it with the probe.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	 But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a fine lead probe, for lead with the lightness of its body is easily bent and follows the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	 And if the fistula has terrible words, it is not possible for you to interpret them over it with a tent.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	 Therefore, irrigate the openings one by one, because the moisture used to irrigate them will go through the other openings and flow from there.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	 And then inquire diligently, according to what method you can know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the cavity of the fistula is distant or near, or if it is a fistula with terrible openings, and all of this is under your strength, with your reasoning, with which you reason with the patient, and the discovery of the pain should be your compression with your hand on the area, and similar to the signs and causes of an abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	 And when you have stood on all these causes with true knowledge, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider if the fistula is apparent nearby or in a safe place, distant from the joint, or from nerves, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I have told you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Then dry the fistula according to what was said before about its nature, and remove whatever is in that filter and of corrupt flesh, and whatever has emerged from the opening of the flesh, or of pus and similar things, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	 Based on the provided context and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	 Based on the pattern you've provided, here's my best guess for a translation of this sentence:
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	 And then restore it with ointments that promote the growth of healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	 But if it is not healed by this method, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	 But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of this, then you should investigate that area and dry it out according to what we have recommended, unless you find any cause related to a vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	 But if the bone is exposed and there is any corruption or blackness in it, then you should scrape it away until all of the corruption is removed; and then treat it with water to promote healing until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	 And if it does not heal and instead throws out pus as before, then you should know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; therefore, you should uncover it again carefully and thoroughly scrape and clean it with strong vinegar, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	 Therefore, if it heals, that is good; but if not, then you should know that the corruption is deep within the body and has not been reached, so in this case your task is only to alleviate the suffering as much as possible.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	 And if the bone is slightly damaged or within your power to extract it, then you should remove it with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	 And if there are many bones [fragments], then carefully remove all of them, and do not leave any remnants with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	 However, if you encounter any resistance from the moist areas, and there is no fear or mistake in their incision, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	 But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at that time, then place something on the wound that can soften it, and leave it until those bones are surrounded by flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it does not heal, and keep the incision constricted which you have made during your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	 Furthermore, if you fear [that the wound will heal], place a cloth soaked in oil or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments on it, for when those ligaments have rotted away and the bones are separated from them, the removal and attraction of those [bones] is eased.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	 "But if it is a large bone such as the thigh or hip bone, and only its surface is affected by decay, then scrape off that part alone until the blackness and decay are removed, and then heal the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	 "But if the decay has affected a large part of it and the corruption has reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to close up that area and cut into it until reaching the point where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	 "And I recommend to you this thing that happened to a man in his thigh, as an example and aid for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	 "There was a young man around 30 years old who experienced pain in his thigh. Within the deeper parts of his body, there was an accumulation of matter that spread to the thigh, and this matter formed a large abscess with pus, and it was not caused by an external factor.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	 "And so the time passed with that due to the error of the physicians until the abscess burst, and foul-smelling matter flowed from it. His treatment was then paused until the thigh was fistulated, and there were made in him many orifices which all discharged pus and the humors of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	 "And then a multitude of doctors gathered around for two years, but none of them knew more about the art than I did, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	 "And he saw the man's thigh and the matters that flowed from him through those openings of his great body; and already the man's body was entirely swollen and his color was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	 "And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings until it reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	 "And then I carefully examined all the openings and found that they penetrated to every part of the thigh.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	 "And then I cut and incised into one of those openings until I discovered a part of the bone, which I found to be corrupt, already decayed, blackened, and rotten; and already a part of the thigh had been corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	 "And then I scraped away what was revealed and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	 "And I believed that it was not in the bone itself but rather the corruption which I had cut out and scraped away, and I had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	 "And then I applied healing medicines to the wound for a long time, but it did not heal.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	 And I will then re-examine and uncover the bones according to the previous examination, and find continuous corruption with the bones.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	 And I will seal that which appears to me due to that corruption, and then I was forced to make the cure of him and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	 And then I uncovered him again and did not stop cutting the bones piece by piece, particularly forcing his restoration, but it was not restored until I cut around a palm's width of him, from which I extracted his marrow, and then I restored that with medicines, and it healed slightly and became healthy.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	 And no further iteration or section of him is necessary except for the disposition of his weakness and the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death in him, because he was constantly fainting due to excessive bad evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	 Therefore, he was healed by complete healing, and nothing is in place of hard flesh; and the disposition of him in his body has been well done and his strength has returned to him; and he walks in his usual ways and no harm has come to him in any way.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	 This text appears to be discussing a surgical procedure involving prominent bones. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	 Sure, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence into English:
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	 And it is necessary that the stitching be done gradually over the affected area, because if the corruption is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface to the touch, then forceful stitching should be applied again.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	 And if the bone is not prominent and one part continues with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, then you uncover all the flesh from every side; and place a stick underneath, and then stitch that of the first part where the corruption has entered until the stitching of the other part is continuous.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	 And let the stitching be according to the location of the corruption, a little at a time, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	 And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupt joint, and stitch the bone where it continues with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	 And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable but dangerous.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	 And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is very difficult; however, it is necessary for you to inquire about the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and that you scrape away that part, and cleanse it according to every possibility that is available to you, and with each difficulty rectify it as best as you can, when a vein or nerve does not contradict you.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	 And know that the tools and saws used for cutting these bones depend on the position of the bones, their preparation, their size, their delicacy, their largeness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore, you must prepare all kinds of suitable instruments for each operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	 And know that this operation requires you to have the appropriate tool; since you are well-versed and knowledgeable in the ways of this art, and you have seen many illnesses, you should already know which instrument is suitable for each illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	 And I, at the end of this chapter, will list the instruments that you should have ready as essentials, with which you will proceed to perform your duties, testing them on others first.
Forma de serra:	 Type/Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	 Another type/form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	 Another form of saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	 Large form of another saw:
Forma de ray:	 Type/Form of file
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	 Let the head of this file be in the shape of a star-shaped key, and its points should be like those of an awl.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	 "And it is not advisable to do anything other than gently rub the joints when they are inflamed, or if the mouth (of the wound) is very large.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	 "A form of razor larger than others.
Forma de razori menor:	 "A smaller form of razor
Forma de razori lat:	 "Lat." or "Latin
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	 "Another type of saw should be made: it should be an arched shape with the iron part more curved and the wooden handle parts decently made.
Forma de lu:	 "Shape of it" or "Its shape
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 "A razor in which there is a concavity (hollow part).
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 "Another subtle type of razor" or "Another fine-edged razor
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 "A razor with a curved edge
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 "Form of a small razor resembling a hook
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 "The shape of an instrument with which bones are cut.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 "Another smaller form of bone cutting tool
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 "Form of another instrument similar to a saw with the end resembling a saw blade, used in many places on the bone.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 "Form of a saw suitable for use in perforating bones.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 "And the end is triangular with a sharp tip.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	 And it is made of Indian iron, and likewise, it should be that all the reasons we have given for razors and scissors and saws apply.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	 Of amputating limbs and of the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	 The limbs may be amputated for either intrinsic or extrinsic reasons: if you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the treatment does not work, sometimes the corruption may spread to a member which has not been affected by any cause; in such cases, it is necessary for you to amputate that member up to where the corruption reaches, so that the patient may be saved from death or greater evil that afflicts the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	 And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black, until it seems to you that fire has burnt it, or perhaps the darkness extends to where the putrefaction has entered that member and takes over the entire body; then you should amputate it immediately.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	 Similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a poisonous strike, such as from a sea scorpion or a viper or a toad and similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	 And if the corruption or swelling is at the tip of the finger, then you should incise the finger and not allow any space for the corruption to enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	 And similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you should incise that (area) from the root of the finger to prevent corruption from spreading to the rest of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	 And if it progresses further, then you should incise the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	 And if the corruption continues to progress and surrounds the elbow, then it is a deadly sign for the patient; and administering another treatment for this at that point is like throwing away virtue (i.e., it's useless).
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	 Similarly, do the same for the foot when corruption reaches the toe of the foot, then you should incise it up to one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	 And if it spreads to the sole of the foot, then you should incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	 But if it spreads into the leg, then you should incise the thigh up to the joint of the leg.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	 And if the corruption has already reached the leg, then there is nothing to do but dismiss (the patient) and leave him to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	 Based on the context and structure of the text, here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	 And it is necessary that a cloth be placed over him from all sides so that the healthy area does not touch, and that a tight and purulent bandage come to the patient.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	 But if there is bleeding when operating, then you should cauterize the area carefully or place some powder that restrains the blood on it; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then bind the afflicted member with a bandage that is suitable, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	 And I recommend to you that if this happens to a man in his foot, the same accident that I and you have mentioned, which is that it causes blackness in his foot due to burning, similar to a fire burn.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	 And that corruption first happens in the toe until it spreads throughout the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	 And then that man prepares for himself pus which he sends to the affected member with great force and vehemence, causing him pain and burning, and then cuts off that foot up to the joint, and becomes healthy.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	 It happened to him many times that same corruption in the big toe of his right hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	 And then it came to me, and I realized that I should expel that excess fluid with water that was placed on the hand of medicines; near the purification of his body; and the excess fluid did not come out and began to go to the other side until it started in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	 And he asked me to cut his hand, and I did not want to do it because I was hoping for the expulsion of that excess fluid, and more than anything I feared the amputation of his dead hand, because the virtue of the patient lay in castration.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	 And after he despaired of me, he returned to his land and it came to me that the man had prepared himself and cut off his entire hand, and he was cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	 And I have included this story only to be of help concerning that which is caught in this illness, and that it may be a sign by which it is indicated and according to which it should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	 About the care of sinews and the quality of enema with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	 When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus comes out of it, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is over it is also thin like a fine cloth, and no further corruption has occurred, and it does not press on the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinew, and not a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	 If the space is prolonged until corruption affects a member, it is called a fistula and not ulcer.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	 And the treatment for it is that you sew up that cord as it is rolled up, especially when it is thinned out and made like a cloth, ensuring that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	 But if you hope that the cord will adhere and that this corruption has not reached any other consequence, and there is a little flesh left on the cord, then you treat it with an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	 And you consider the sinus, and if it is large and the arm has a fetid odor, then treat it with an enema of Egyptian medicine, which is made of oil, vinegar, and honey, mixed in equal parts in a vessel, and boiled over the fire until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	 Then you take from it the necessary amount and dissolve it in water and honey; and enema the sinus with that, and strengthen its orifices, and let the medicine stay there for the duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	 And then extract it with disdain; and do this for as many days as necessary until the wound is cleansed and the odor is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	 And at times it is irrigated with water of ashes, when this medicine is not available; and it is that you take the ashes of grape vines, and put them in water; and then use that to irrigate until you are certain that the wound is closed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	 And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then irrigate them with water and honey mixed well together, and also irrigate them with wine and honey mixed together, because by the property of honey it cleanses and washes, and the wine makes the wound adhere, especially when in the wine there is an excess of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	 And when you do this a few times and are certain that the wound has healed, then irrigate them with water that causes flesh to grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	 And it is that you take of the ointment called diaphenicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or that you irrigate them with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	 And if the orifice of the sinus is too narrow to receive the cannula of the clyster, then you should widen it little by little with an iron [instrument], and place a bandage wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is sufficiently widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	 And similarly, if the orifice is too large, then you should bring its lips together with stitches and leave it in such a way that the clyster can enter without additional effort.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	 And if the orifice of which the arm is raised to the higher parts above, then dry it in the lowest place that is in it so that the arm runs below, for when the arm is constricted in the narrowness of the sinus, flesh will be generated in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	 And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the area of the lower bone as you wish, then make an opening through which the arm can pass more easily, according to what seems appropriate to you, and ensure that there are no impediments or obstacles in its path.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	 And take consolidating medicines, place them on the sinus appropriately according to what you want, extend those [medicines] over a linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	 And let the cloth be of such great quantity that it covers the entire area of the wound; and then cut with scissors on the right side of the opening of the wound, a slit slightly wider than the opening of the wound; and then extend over another cloth from the ointments the lions according to the size of the slit, and place it over that for long-term positioning of the opening of the wound so that the flow of the arm is eased and the large cloth is not disturbed except perhaps once every few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	 But that which is on the opening of the wound should always be changed, so that what is absorbed from it by the arm may be removed.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	 And to know if that which flows from his arm is too much or too little, whether it is digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	 And thus you should consider the location of that wound, whether the patient feels pain in it or not, and whether there is an abscess within it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	 And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter which is laid on the opening of the wound has adhered or nearly adhered, then you should detach it on the third day, and when you uncover the wound, then change the cloth for another and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	 Based on the context and the pattern of translation from the provided sentences, here's a line-by-line attempt to translate the given text:
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	 And if from the chest after a few days indigestion persists, then know that the chest is not adhering; and if the adhesion of the chest is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you should apply a drying treatment with medicines. If the medicines are moist in their substance and in their power, they will be dry like diaphanous ointment when applied to remove excess fluid from the body.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	 And the most effective treatment is to take diaphanous ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it warmly with ancient honey in its substance. Then prepare this mixture with the patient, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	 And when there is no ointment, make it seem so by taking mastic, aloe and sesame seeds, grinding all together into a powder and sprinkling it over honey that is being heated on the fire. Then line a cloth with this mixture and place it firmly on the chest; or you can also mix this powder with the honey you have previously thickened, and then spread it on a cloth and apply it to the chest.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	 And sometimes it is administered with him long-rooted aristolochia, lily of the valley root (which is lily of the valley), and flour made from barley and centaury. Use these simple or compound ingredients: grind them, sift them, and sprinkle the powder over the honey you have heated; then use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	 And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in his bowels, and it is already spreading to the bones or other hard members or ligaments; at this point, you treat him with fistula treatment, as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	 Of the treatment of carbuncles and infected nails, and the addition of finger incisions and amputations.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	 Carbuncle is an abscess that forms under the nail of the finger or toe, and it can also form on other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its treatment is less valued, or it is an abscess from another abscess, or it becomes corrupt, and it throws pus into the root of the nail, and it corrodes that totally, and soon its corruption reaches the bone, so that it has a foul odor, and the tip of the finger is lame, and its color turns black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	 Therefore, when you have that with water as we said in the division and do not perform your treatment, then it is necessary for you to incise with iron all the superfluousness that remains of the nail and then cauterize the wound with this, because cautery is very useful in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Here's the translation of your text:
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	 But if corruption has already affected the bone, then you should cut out that bone and remove it, for no time will heal a corrupted bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 But if you see the decay and corruption going into the finger, then cut it off at one of the joints according to how much you remember it, and then cure that part until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	 But if there is a bruise or cut on the fingernail and it causes intense pain, then you should first bleed the patient at the beginning. Then dry the nail with a sharp spatula by making a transverse cut from top to bottom, but be careful that the cut does not go into the flesh beneath the nail, because you will cause intense pain for the patient and it will cause excessive growth of the adjacent skin in that place; and then cure that place with water that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	 But this excessive growth, which is born in the hands of some men, is very fleshy all over, and it is very easy to cut through their bones, or it is very easy to cut through their nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	 And some of them are born at the base of the joints, or they grow in some of the said joints.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	 But one who is born with certain nodes on the finger does not suffer greatly, and one who is born with strong joints suffers more.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	 And for those who are born fleshy, the incision should be light, and you must cut it with a Latin spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	 But for one who is born with the thinness of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, beware of their infection.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 But for one who is born with the nodes on the finger, you should cut the flesh at the beginning round into the bone, and then cauterize it with an appropriate iron, and then care for that until it heals.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	 But the healing that occurs between their obvious nodes, either by the nature of man who is born thus, or by the healing of a wound, or by the burning of fire, or by resemblance, then you should cut away that healing until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	 And then place between them cloths soaked in rose oil to prevent them from healing too easily, and separate them or place a thin lead sheet between them until they heal as necessary.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	 It seems like you're providing sentences from an old medical text, possibly written in Occitan or Catalan due to the similarities with Spanish, Italian, French, and Latin. I'll do my best to translate them into English while preserving the original meaning as much as possible.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	 Of vices, there are varieties.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	 Vices are varicose veins, which are thick, swollen veins filled with melancholic excess that often appear in the limbs of the body, most commonly in the legs. They are especially common among travelers, workers, and those who carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	 Therefore, you should administer purgation of the body with black hellebore several times, along with a strong evacuant, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	 However, their treatment with iron is done in two ways: one is that it be incised and the black blood be drawn out, and the other way is that the vein be raised and all of it be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	 The incision is done in this manner: first, soak the leg with hot water until the thick blood, which is coagulated in the leg, dissolves. Then strengthen the leg of the patient at the upper part of the thigh, from the lower part of the knee to the groin, with a bandage. Then make one or two or three wide incisions on the vein, and then lift the black blood with your left hand from below the leg upwards and downwards until you have removed as much blood as you desire and believe is sufficient for the patient's benefit.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	 And then bind it up, and instruct him to abstain from eating black bile-producing foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	 And continue the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are full and this will be beneficial for the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	 But the elevation of their [limbs] should be done in this manner: you who raise the patient's leg, if there are hairs on it, first shave it; then place it in a bath and soak the leg with hot water until it reddens and the veins become prominent. Or if there is no bath available, exercise the limb vigorously until it becomes hot.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	 And then dry the ligature on the right side of the vein by making an incision in the hollow or behind it you will find the nerve, or lower down you will find the tendon.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	 And then open the ligature with scissors and strip the vein from all sides until it appears sensitive, and it is there that you will find the swelling that turns black when pressed.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	 And then, having evacuated [the blood], if you see that vein become white, it should be tied off.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	 And then place the vein below [the incision] and raise it up until it is released from the ligature, and suspend it with a silk thread.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence into English:
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	 And then raise it and slice it into the posterior section behind the ankle, and then extract it and lift it until it is pushed out by the second section, and then extract it from the section above that one.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	 And do this until you have extracted it from the highest section or furthest of all sections, until everything is pushed out; and then slice that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	 And if it does not obey your attempt to extract and lift, then insert a double-bladed needle with a strong thread and tie it off, and extract it, or insert the reed underneath and turn your hand around until everything is expelled.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	 And ensure that it is not cut; because if it breaks, it will be difficult for you to lift that part and it may harm the patient due to that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And once everything has been expelled, then place over the wound location wool soaked in oil and both rosemary oil and plain oil, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	 And if the intestine is twisted with tortuosity that it is wrapped around the parts, and it is not straight according to what we have said, then you should cut along that throughout its tortuosity and at the places of its wrapping, and then suspend it with hooks until you lift all of it.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	 And you should be careful with your section to avoid cutting the vein and hurting it, for it will be difficult for you to lift it up; and keep your prudence in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	 The shape of the wound through which the vessel has been cut
Forma de unci orp:	 Shape of a hook
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	 It is not sharp like a hook nor does it have a sharp tip to avoid hurting the vein; it should be thick and flexible, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; thus, it has an unnecessary thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	 On the extraction of the vein in the leg
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	 This vein is produced in the thighs in hot lands, such as in Athens in Arabic lands and in hot and dry Indian lands of little fertility where there is neither grass nor trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	 And it is produced strongly in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	 And its formation is due to putrefaction that comes from the intestines, like the venom of snakes and worms and scorpions and worms generated between the intestines and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	 And the sign of the onset of this condition is that this vein appears in the thigh as a violent inflammation; and then the area swells up; and then the vein begins to emerge from the site of that swelling, looking like a plant's root.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	 And then when the extremity emerges from him, it is necessary that you wrap around it a weight of lead which weighs between one and two drachms, knot it and leave the lead hanging from his thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	 And each time you see any part emerging outward from him for some reason, wrap it in lead and tie it off.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	 And if the part is prolonged, then you should cut off a section of it and wrap up the remainder; and do not cut it too close until it has been completely expelled, because if you cut it too short, it will contract and enter into the flesh, causing an abscess and pus in that place and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	 Therefore, it should be gently pulled out and removed little by little until it is completely expelled from him, so that no part remains in his body for any reason.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	 And from this vein there emerges in some men something that is the length of five palms and ten fingers, and I have already heard of one that was twenty palms long.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	 And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert the ray into the opening and pierce it with a long hole through his body until everything that is in the matter has been evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the place for some days with medicines; and then treat it according to the treatment for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	 And this vein sometimes has large bulges, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes to him with many openings, and it exits from each opening as a branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	 And therefore treat it as we said in the division and with that which is mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	 On cutting over worms generated under the skin, and it is called cattle sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	 This illness is named in some regions cattle sickness because many times it befalls the oxen and there is a worm which is born between the skin and the flesh, and it goes through the entire body ascending and descending, and its progression is felt from member to member until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	 And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as it happens with worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	 And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the eye, then it very quickly destroys it and enters and destroys the eye, and this happens many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	 And therefore when you want to cure this and extract it, then it is not done unless by the sensation of its movement and appearance, and then it is necessary that you have something over it and something under it with strong binding and constriction, and then dry over it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if it is rotten in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery with fire on the spot until death, and the most feared cause is corruption of the flesh which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	 And if you see that [something] has reached near the head towards the eye, then strengthen the eyelid with a strong constriction, and quickly close it, and remove [the object]; and it is necessary for the patient to use purgative medicines for evacuating bad putrid humors, and beware of foods that cause putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	 On cutting for earache.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	 This illness is called earache in our land, and it is pain that comes to certain members, and then changes from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	 And I have seen it according to what I will tell you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	 I was called to see a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after it had been broken for an hour, I saw that inflammation move as if it were a worm ascending to this place, but lighter than being able [to move], as if it were quicksilver when it runs from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	 And then go away from that painful place and insert yourself into the muscle, and then stay here for one hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	 And then run to the other body until you reach the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	 And then recount to me that you revolved through the entire body, as I saw; and I was greatly amazed at the transformation of him and the speed from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	 And I had already seen this before in my eyes in that manner, but I have never seen words that cause pain being transferred from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	 But I did not see it with the eyes as I do in a woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	 And I did not think that this was anything other than because the woman was old, with dry body and exposed veins, and in her it appeared to the touch that windiness had been transferred.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	 And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this treatment in those who are delicate and with moist bodies and closed veins.  /> E en aqueles qui son delicioses e am cors sec, es necessari que lo mestre sia avertit de le paratges de l’aigua e del foc, e de les calideses e frigiditats, e de los quals son convenientz per lo tracte, e de los quals non.  /> And in those who are delicate and with dry bodies, it is necessary that the master be skilled in the properties of water and fire, and of heat and cold, and of which ones are suitable for the treatment, and which are not.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	 And when you want to treat the patient and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to your eye as we have said, then you strengthen over that area, and leave it slightly and gently until that trapped wind is released, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	 But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat it by purging the body and with something that expels wind, and treat those with foul-smelling pills and with pills of serpentine and the like.
De extraccio de sagetas.	 On the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	 Arrows are differentiated according to their types and the parts of the body in which they are lodged, because their diversity is that there are those with large tips, small ones, concave ones, blunt ones, solid ones; and there are those with three edges, and among them there are those with tongues; and there are those with barbs.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	 And that which is according to the members and parts in which it has lodged is according to two manners: for the members are either principal members, such as the brain, the heart, the liver, the lung, the kidney, the intestines, and the bladder, and the like; and therefore when it strikes one of these members and you see signs of death, which I will explain shortly, then you should avoid extracting that arrow from those in which death would be in the member with the most dispositions, and when these evils do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the member, then extract it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	 And of the signs of the injury it is when an arrow strikes him, and it pierces the bone, and it exits from the cavity that is above the brain, for this occurs due to the strong force, and darkness before the eyes, and dizziness, and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile, and strongly the speech is cut off and the voice is destroyed, and from the place of the wound white moisture like dust comes out, and his eyes are like the wateriness of meat.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	 And so if these signs appear to you, then abstain from the treatment and removal of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	 But the signs of an arrow wound to the heart are as follows: it is near the left nipple, and one feels with that movement as if it has struck a hard object, and it is not a superficial wound; furthermore, the movement of the arrow is like the pulse, and black blood runs from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and a foetid odour, and fainting; and thus you know that death approaches without delay.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	 And the signs when the arrow has struck the lung are: frothy blood coming from the wound, and the veins near the neck are distended, and there is a change in the patient's color, and they exhale a great deal of breath, and they crave cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	 And if the arrow strikes the peritoneum which is in the abdomen, then the pain will be near the small ribs, and there will be a great deal of pain with intense suffering and sighing, and all the limbs' muscles will not be well.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	 And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then undigested food will come out of the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	 If the arrow strikes the belly and is embedded in the person, if there is any opening of the wound, or cloth, or intestine that has been torn apart, and there is no hope for the cure by extracting the arrow,
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	 And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine comes out, and there is any process that causes it to come out from the parts, and severe pain occurs in the patient, then you should know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	 But the other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, joints, vertebrae of the back, collarbone, pelvis, thigh and their similar parts are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	 And I will tell you this about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand for yourself how to heal from them.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	 The reason is that in a man an arrow was stuck in his tear duct of the eye at the root of his nose, and I extracted it from him on the other side, leaving its head in his ear, and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	 And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had struck him in the gray of his eye, below the eyelid, and the arrow was hidden and only a small tip remained attached to its shaft, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, with lion's iron, on which there were no fletchings.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	 And if the patient is a judge, do not attribute this misfortune to his evil eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	 And I extracted another arrow from a man of Cretia that had struck him in the throat. This was an Arabic arrow, one of those with feathers; and when I inserted my hand between two fleshy parts, it was already submerged in his throat. And so I skillfully pulled it out along with the arrowhead, and then I extracted it, and thus healed the man of Cretia.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	 And I extracted another arrow from a man that had struck him in the belly, and I thought he would die because of it; but after thirty days had passed without any change in his condition, I inserted my hand over the arrow and pulled it out, and he was cured, and no further misfortune befell him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	 And I saw another man in whom an arrow had struck his back, and the wound had healed over it; and after seven years, the arrow emerged through the flesh of the wound.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	 And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had struck her belly, and the wound had healed within her, and there was no change in her condition, and the woman did not suffer any harm to any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	 And I saw another man to whom an arrow fell into his face and the wound was healed and the arrow broken, but he did not find much pain here, and he had similar marks as these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	 And extract the arrow from the man of the king's princes, which was shot into the middle of his nose and had already declined slightly towards the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	 And I was called to treat him shortly after the arrow penetrated, within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	 And then I found the arrow wound to be very narrow; and then I explored it with a fine probe, but did not feel it; however, he felt a point below his right ear, and then I suspected that this point was from the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	 And I applied a plaster to the area with attracting and digestive properties, hoping that the swelling would subside so that the arrow's location could be revealed to me, in order to act upon it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	 And no significant accident occurred in the area to indicate that the arrow had reached that location; and I continued with the plaster on him for many days, but no accident occurred; and the wound healed during this time, and the patient recovered from the extraction over the course of many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and told me about it. )))
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	 And then I placed on the wound a sharp, corrosive medicine for several days until the fire opened up, and with a probe, I explored it and found the subtle tip of an arrow, which was attached to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	 And then I adjusted the medicine in the wound so that it became visible to me, and I let time pass with this for four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	 And after the wound had become inflamed, and it was possible for me to insert the tweezers into it, and they remained there without obstruction, I did not stop trying and inventing with various means until one day I managed to extract it with tweezers made for this purpose, as will be described at the end of this chapter. And then I healed the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	 And while some doctors thought that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, I managed to restore it and heal the wound completely, and the patient was cured entirely without any recurrence.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	 And I will explain to you the technique of removing certain arrows so that you can follow this rule and its meaning, which I have not yet explained, because the principles of this art and their definitions are not understood through narrative alone, nor do they understand them in books.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	 And the skilled craftsmen compare a little with much; and what is present with what is absent; and they find new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes in the art when it occurs.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	 Therefore, I say that arrows are not removed from the members in which they are stuck except in two ways: either by attraction of the place in which they enter, or by contraries of the other parts.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	 And that which is thrown into the place where it entered, either is an arrow coming from a fleshy place and is pulled out and extracted.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	 And if it does not obey extraction at the time when it was caught, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh around it softens and its attraction and exit are made easier.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	 Similarly, if it is stuck in the bone and does not obey your extraction, then leave that one for some days and repeat that with attraction and moisture each day, and then it will be extracted.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	 And if it does not obey your extraction after some days, then you should perforate around the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine awl until the place is enlarged by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	 And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone and does not penetrate into the cavity, and the patient remains for some days without experiencing any of these symptoms, then you should focus on extracting the arrow and healing the patient.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 But if the arrow does not obey your attempt to remove it, then you should administer herbs around the arrow as we have recommended, and then care for the wound until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	 But if the arrow has been hidden within the body and is concealed from feeling, then you should inquire with a probe, and if you feel it, then remove it using various instruments suitable for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	 And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins in its path, then you should cut into the wound until it is enlarged enough to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	 And if the arrow is lodged in the ears or other bony structures, then you should cut away all the flesh around it with all the skill you can muster; and then work on extracting it, twisting and breaking the bones as necessary until the arrow gives way.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	 And when you administer the removal of the arrow in any place where it may be, then use a tourniquet with your hand and forceps for all parts until it obeys; and handle it with utmost delicacy so that the arrow is not broken and that it is done with great difficulty in removing it and its extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	 And if you cannot do so in your time, then leave it for some days until the parts around it soften, and then attempt again when it is less painful.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	 But if there is a counter-indication of bleeding, then administer what we have said in the chapter on treatment.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	 And beware of causing injury to a vein, nerve, or tendon, and administer caution in every possible way to avoid the arrow; and do this with ease and tranquility and slowness and steadiness, as I have recommended to you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	 And therefore, adjust the arrow so that the patient is in a position according to the figure as you should have placed the shot of the arrow in him, because it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	 But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	 Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence into English:
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	 If it is lodged in the bone, then you should twist and turn the lance according to its opposite direction until the arrow penetrates into the bone, expand it at that point, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	 If not, leave it there for several days, and then try again until it comes out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	 And if the shaft of the arrow is still in it, then you should remove that with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	 But if the shaft has broken off and you want to administer a probing, then you should insert that, if it is blunt, with a concave instrument so that the concavity of it fits into the back of the arrow, and then remove that with it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	 But if the arrow is concave, then you should remove that with a strong instrument entering it, because the arrow is weakened by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	 And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh in which the tip is located, as much as possible for you, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And if the arrow hits the foot, or the stomach, or the bladder, or the side, and it is accessible so that you can touch it with your finger, and it is possible to cut over it, then cut over it and beware of cutting a vein or nerve, and extract it, and then sew up the wound if necessary, and treat it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	 Form of forceps with which arrows are drawn:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	 Their extremities resemble the beak of a bird, made like a saw, which grips onto the arrow so that it does not slip away.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	 And of these are made various types of points, large, few and finer, according to the size of the arrow and its slenderness, as well as the width of the wound and the constriction caused by it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	 Shape of the concave end of this curved extremity, similar to a bird's wing, so that the entry of the arrow into it is facilitated and the force of its impact is softened.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	 Shape of the blunt end of the blunt extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	 similar to a beam, so that its entry into the curved arrow is facilitated and it is propelled by that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	 Of phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	 The veins commonly used for phlebotomy are 36, of which there are 16 in the head: two pulsatile veins near the ears called auriculars; two branches on each temple; and two veins on each lacrimal duct of the eyes called aspicientz; a vein in the middle of the forehead; a vein at the tip of the nose; two jugulars at the throat; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip, these are called angelic; and there are two veins below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	 And in the foot and leg, there are three veins: one of them is beneath the curve of the wild boar's tendon; and the second is called saphenous, and its location is beneath the domestic pig's leg; and the sciatic vein, and its location is beneath the wild boar's leg; and in the leg are other similar veins.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	 The treatment for the veins near the ears is for old cataracts, migraines, headaches, and ancient ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	 And the method of bleeding these veins is as I have told you: it is that the patient's head be shaved, and the patient's head be rubbed in the occipital region where both veins are located with a broad cloth with good friction; then tightly bind the patient's neck with a bandage so that the two [veins] and their locations are near the ears on both sides of the head; and you will seek this with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of these [veins] with your finger, here is the sign.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	 Then take the incising scalpel, and it is this one that you insert under the vein in the bend until the lancet reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	 And then raise your hand with the vein and the tendon towards the divided parts above and cut the vein with an incisive incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	 And let the length of the incision be the size of two fingers or around that; and make as much blood come out as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Then strengthen with bandages and leave it until it heals.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	 And as has been mentioned at the beginning of this book, the incision and its cauterization are described here.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	 But of the two arterial veins in the temples, the help of phlebotomy is for migraines of ancient origin and severe headaches, persistent cataracts, and excessively acute bodily humors.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	 And the method of phlebotomizing those veins is as I have instructed you: constrict the patient's neck with your hand until both veins are clearly visible and palpable by touch, and demonstrate their pulse under your finger; then you can proceed with certainty.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 Then raise the tendon above the vein towards the divided parts with your index finger, and insert the phlebotomy incision below it, and lift the vein upwards; and cut it as you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And then unbind the patient's bandage, place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then press firmly on that spot with cotton wool and cloth, holding it tightly in place until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	 And already the memory of them, and their inscription, and their attraction are at the beginning of this book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	 And thus the bloodletting of the frontal vein is similar to the bloodletting of the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face and migraine, fever, and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And the quality of the bloodletting for this is as I advise you; thus, the patient should tighten their neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, and this is its form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Place the pointed end of the lancet on that vein and strike it with a hammer or other heavy object in the manner described, allowing the blood to flow as much as you wish; then unbind the patient's wound and hold it tightly until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	 And sometimes it is opened with a broad bloodletting instrument, but it is not necessary that the bloodletting instrument be sharp like the others, rather it should be blunt, and let it cut through transversely, because the bone is close by and very easily broken by the bloodletting instrument when it is thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	 This passage appears to be discussing the treatment of eye issues related to inflammation and discharge. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	 And the nature of phlebotomy is such that the patient should have their head bound with a bandage, and then you should perform phlebotomy on them, while standing over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	 And the phlebotomy should be performed along the length with a small amount of blood taken at a time, because in that area there is little flesh; and if the needle is fine, the end of it may break easily.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 And then let the blood run as much as is necessary for you, and press on that wound, and bind it tightly for one night, and then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	 But phlebotomy of the nose vein is beneficial for acute fever and severe headache, and for facial illnesses and migraines that occur on the face, especially when they are chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	 And the technique of this phlebotomy is that the patient should tie their head and then take their nose with your left hand, and take a thin, long fleam and place it in the middle of the nasal bridge along its length, because the vein does not appear to the touch here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	 Therefore you should gradually remove your hand with the fleam and let the blood flow according to your need; and then bind it for one night, because it heals easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	 The sentence seems to discuss the adverse effects of bloodletting from both sides (veins), mentioning conditions like epilepsy, leprosy, various illnesses, and corrosive ulcers. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	 And the quality of this phlebotomy is that the patient must lie on their back with their head bound; and let the practitioners be positioned over the patient's head, and the patient should be sitting on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	 And then proceed with phlebotomy by opening the vein with an ample incision gradually; and then extract blood according to measured quantity or as many times as necessary; and then do the same with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	 And then untie the bandage and tightly bind both veins to prevent the patient from bleeding out, and leave them until morning when the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	 And the benefit of phlebotomy of the engorged veins is that it cures small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and fissures, and also bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	 And the method of this phlebotomy is that you should sit the patient in front of you, and bind their neck with a bandage, and then turn back their lips and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the distinguishing feature of each is their darkness compared to both, and this is more so because there are small black veins around them; and then incise each with a sharp incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	 If there is doubt about which one to choose and you don't know which of them it is, then you should perform an incision on the larger one and the more obvious one.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	 And make an incision in the two veins that are located above the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	 However, it is customary to incise both veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	 But of the two veins that are beneath the tongue, it is most appropriate to perform phlebotomy on the cephalic vein, especially when there are predispositions in the hypoglossal nerve, at the illness of the uvula, and at illnesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	 The method of phlebotomizing those veins is to make the patient sit between your hands in front of you, lift their tongue, and look under the tongue. From one side of the vein will come dark blood, and from the other side light blood.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	 Then phlebotomize each vein; and be careful not to press too hard with your hand while phlebotomizing those, because beneath them are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 The veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those commonly used by all men. Their phlebotomy is performed in two ways: either they use a fleam with myrtle or olive oil, subtly declining; or they use a scalpel to cauterize and call it "alnessil," and this is its form.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	 And this anointment is suitable for scarring and of those are species that are sharp and subtle according to the width of the veins and according to the narrowness of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	 Formula for bloodletting with myrtle:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	 It should be the sharp edges of it, and as many times as necessary, and it is suitable for opening the full, obvious large veins, and those that contain thick, disturbed blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	 And this is the formula for bloodletting with olive:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	 And this bloodletting is of lesser sharpness and more subtle extremity, and it is suitable for bloodletting of the subtle veins that contain subtle yellowish blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	 But the advantage of bloodletting from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins, is that it extracts the blood of those who are suffering from gout and colic, and from that which causes swelling of the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	 And it is advisable for the bloodletter, when performing that bloodletting, to be very careful and cautious with it, because beneath it there is an artery, and if he errs and strikes in the puncture of the bloodletting, he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood, so it is necessary not to perform that bloodletting with a sharp fleam, but rather to incise first with a blunt instrument.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if the basilica does not appear in a clear manner, then you should leave that one and move to another, or search for some branches of it; or you may perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm, because that is manifested; and afterwards, apply the fleubotomi alnessil similarly as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	 If you wish to perform phlebotomy on the same person, then it is necessary before the stricture of the arm that you touch the area until you recognize the pulse location, and then place a cloth over it with care; and then lift the arm and cut the vein with a concave section using the fleubotomi alnessil as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery in some part of the area.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	 And when you see, as the ligature tightens, swelling in the place that you have covered with cloth, then that swelling is from the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	 And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy as thin as a child's urine, and the blood is subtle red, then know that it is from the artery of the blood; and at this time you should cut and press your finger over it for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the blood has stopped flowing, which is usually the case, then tighten the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	 And protect the patient from their own spittle and be careful not to let it fall on them for several days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	 But if the blood has not been cut off and you do not have medicine at hand, then you should cut the artery if it appears to you; because the extremity is constricted and the blood is cut off. Or take a scraper of fistic, make an incision with it, and take half of it and strengthen it over the vein's place with a tight bandage, and bind it with linen and powder for another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	 And then if the blood has been cut off, it is good; and if not, then treat it with the remedy that was mentioned before to stop the bleeding at the place of the powder.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	 And stopping the bleeding from them is difficult in many situations because of the small size of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	 But the phlebotomy of the dark vein is useful for extracting blood from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	 And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein lengthwise.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	 The advantage of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and heals the infirmities of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	 It is particularly advisable in this case, if you wish to perform phlebotomy with the olive tree or myrtle needle; for it is the safest of all veins, as there are no arteries or nerves left behind.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	 However, you must take care during the phlebotomy to ensure that with the needle you do not pierce the end of the lacert (a type of lizard or salamander), and seek the lighter spot, and do not notice it, unless it is found by the first percussion that it is above where the phlebotomy is performed.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	 However, it happens that the swelling is very light in some men, so that it is not noticed at the first incision; but do not pay attention to that swelling either.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	 But the quality of that phlebotomy and its effects must be considered in order to correct them.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	 The first thing to consider is that you should know that phlebotomy is administered only for the preservation of health and hope for improvement, as well as precaution against illnesses, and that it should be performed on one of the veins in the elbow, namely: cephalic, dark and basilica; and that it should be done at the beginning of spring, fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter after a meal, when signs of fullness appear.  (Note: "fusca" is likely a misspelling or misunderstanding of "median cubital", another name for the median antebrachial vein.)
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	 It seems like the text is discussing a medical procedure. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	 "Phlebotomy (bloodletting), when administered, is most effective and necessary for this purpose, whether at night or during the day, at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	 "A child should not be bled until they are fourteen years old, and a pregnant woman should only be bled from the fourth to the seventh month, and those over sixty years of age should not be bled.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	 "And before someone is bled in any manner, they should purge their bowels with a leonine clyster (enema), if there are many retained fissures, so that the veins do not draw the superfluities of the corrupt bowels into the bloodletting, which can harm the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	 "Patients who are certainly suffering from nausea or drunkenness should not be bled until it has passed; nor those recovering from illness or fever, nor hydropic patients. Phlebotomy should also be avoided in cases of colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, excessive sexual activity, hard work, or fasting and vigils, and any other cause that weakens the vital force of either the body or soul.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	 And then consider in subtlety of humors before this if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medicines if it is possible for him to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	 And then enter a bath if no cause prevents it, or exercise through some activity so that the blood is thinned.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And perform the phlebotomy on him in the morning, around the third hour, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	 And ensure that the patient's feet are protected on that day from all animal ailments, such as distress, anger, fear, and from all bodily ailments, such as labor and unnecessary pain, and coitus and its likes.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	 And at his bedside, have the causes of use be present with aromatics and fragrances, and with balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	 And let the phlebotomist sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who must be bled.  (In this context, the phlebotomist is the person performing the bloodletting.)
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	 And then the patient should extend their arm, and the phlebotomist should rub it with their hand two or three times; and then tighten the ligature with a cord and wrap it two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	 Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	 And before the incision, it is necessary that the person who is to be phlebotomized rubs their hands together until the veins are swollen and clearly felt.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	 And before the phlebotomist anoints the patient's vein with a small amount of proper oil; and then places the index finger of his left hand over that vein, below the place where he wants to make the incision, so that the vein is moved slightly, and the blow is stopped because of the veins that are found in this way like fleeing cords, the phlebotomist must find one that is full of airiness, and when he places his finger on it, it contracts under the finger, and it is discovered to the phlebotomist; and the patient does not move the vein, and if he moves it, that vein is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	 Therefore, for this reason, the phlebotomist must be attentive and concerned about all these things.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	 And then remove the finger, but if the vein is opened in one attempt, that's good; and if not, you should try again in another spot slightly below that place, or above it with haste, if the place is not inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	 And if the area is inflamed or the patient becomes feverish, then you should leave it for a day or two, and do not apply the bandage tightly, because the heat will draw out the pus quickly, nor should they enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	 Then repeat the bloodletting if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	 And if the opening is small and blood flows gently, and you fear that it will not flow in the desired amount, then repeat the bleeding at that spot according to what is right and adjust the opening slightly, and do this quickly before the area becomes inflamed, for in many men a small opening is necessary when the area is inflamed.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	 But if you see that it is already inflamed, then do not repeat [the bleeding] on it, for it does not accept any action from you; and place on it some of the oil wound dressing, for it relieves the body of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	 And this is better in this case than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	 Similarly, administer the oil wound dressing in all bloodlettings where you must prohibit the flow of blood from the body, and use theriac alfadoc and sagzenea when one of these is placed on the area, for the blood is thinned and turned back when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	 And if in the place of bloodletting a large abscess has been formed, which occurs frequently and especially in those who have not been bled except for this time, or when the vein is scarcely opened, then you take and place on the affected area a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly squeezed, and hold it there for an hour, because it will dissolve.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	 And it is necessary that this be done near the exiting point of the blood from that vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	 And if some blackness or greenish color remains in the area for several days, do not worry about it; and if you wish, place on that area some aloe and myrrh dissolved together, or some mint juice or camphor, or something similar to that.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	 And such abscesses and swellings frequently require bloodletting from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	 Therefore, place your hand on it, and if you find softness there, keep your pressure on it, because that swelling is bad and dangerous; and then be careful not to place any cold compress on it, because the blood will flow profusely from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And make a plaster with water that has been boiled down to a syrup-like consistency, so that the area is hardened, and then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	 And it is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the quantity of their vitality and according to the predominant color in their blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	 Because if the blood is black, then you should let it out until it becomes red; similarly, if you see that it is thick, then you should let it out until it becomes thinned; and likewise, if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	 And it is necessary for someone who is full and strong and has a need to extract blood in one sitting, that the phlebotomy of the vein be enlarged and that the incisions be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	 And for someone who is weak, do the opposite of that, and it is necessary to draw blood from them in several sittings, and the incision should be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	 And the best practice for phlebotomy of a vein is that it should be a transverse cut, not a prick.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	 And this method of phlebotomy is safe from an excess flow of blood and injury to nerves, and it is more commendable and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	 Sure, let's translate this line by line:
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	 And if it is coldness due to a complexion, then before the bloodletting, infuse with syrup of myrrh or with scented syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar ones, or with very aromatic syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	 And if a fainting occurs during bloodletting and it is due to the loss of much blood, then one should give to drink water from meat and very fragrant syrup; and use aromatization with aloe, and anoint their feet with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	 And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	 And whoever wants to stretch their arm and dissolve their blood according to need, it is necessary for the person from whom much blood is being drawn, and whose strength is weak, that they evacuate the blood little by little, which is according to the quantity of their strength in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	 But whoever wants to stretch their arm and expel their blood again at the appropriate time, and their body is strong, then they should do this about seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	 Here's my attempt at translating this line:
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	 This text appears to be discussing a medical procedure related to bloodletting or phlebotomy. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	 And it is not necessary when you want to loosen the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since the openings of the vein are already closed and it has become difficult for the blood to exit, that you press on that area with great force and slightly extend the arm, because this is too severe.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	 Wait until it has been properly blood-let according to the method; or remain there with the sharpness of the blood-letting instrument, which is coagulated blood in the vein openings; or place on that some *tyriaca alfarach* or *sagzenea*, and press lightly on it until the blood has come out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	 And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	 And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then bleed that person in the same place or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	 And the vein called "funis del bras" is blood-let in place of the "fusca" or "basilica", when they are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	 And the method of blood-letting for him is that the patient place his hand in hot water until the lancet becomes red hot and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	 And immediately a bandage should be tightly wrapped around the wound with a moderate pressure; and immediately perform phlebotomy according to the transverse small vein, neither longitudinally nor along the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	 And make the incision wide and perform phlebotomy with that which you use to bleed on the joint of the hand a little bit.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	 And if the flow of blood is inhibited, then immerse the hand in hot water and allow the blood to run into the water until you achieve your goal.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	 However, if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from the immersion of the hand in hot water, and it is appropriate to place the body of the blood in hot water during winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	 And bleeding from this vein is safer than from any other veins, because there are no pulsating veins or nerves afterwards.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	 And the phlebotomy of the little toe of the right foot is beneficial for liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	 And the quality of its bleeding is that you wrap the hand tightly with a bandage or with your hand, after you have placed it in hot water, until the vein is swollen and well visible; and then bleed it transversely; and if you incise it completely, this will not cause harm.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	 And take care not to burn your hand with phlebotomy, for the nerves mentioned are exposed and without flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	 And immediately immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the opening of the vein, and it will become blocked.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	 And when the blood has been extracted to the necessary amount, then place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not close immediately; and similarly, you should do this for every narrow vessel.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	 However, the benefit of phlebotomy from the left hand is that it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	 And perform phlebotomy on him in a similar manner as you did with the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	 And the benefit of phlebotomy from the saphenous vein is for diseases in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the uterus and retained menses, and for diseases of the hips and old ulcers on the thighs and legs, and similar diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	 And the method of phlebotomy for this is that the patient immerse their foot in hot water and make a friction on it until the veins appear; then bind the ankle with a band; and where the vein appears, you should prick with the needle, and from there the veins branch out on the surface of the foot like roots.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	 And therefore you should perform a phlebotomy on the widest part of the leg below the knee and up to the ankle, because it is better and healthier.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	 And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be cautious of the nerves that are underneath it on the surface of the foot, and place your phlebotomy in such a way that you cut through [the skin], as if you were trying to slice it open.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	 And let the phlebotomies be visible.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	 However, if the outflow of blood is inhibited; then you should immerse his foot in hot water and let the blood flow until it is fully evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then repeat with the phlebotomy a little higher, because the place is healthier; and do not fear evil effects, but be cautious of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	 And likewise, do the same with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	 And for the sciatic vein, the place is as we have said, below the knee and above the wild part.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	 The remedy for his phlebotomy is at the pain in the hip when it is due to excess blood.  (Note: "caut" here means "excessive" or "too much")
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	 And the quality of his bloodletting is that the patient enters a bath, and is quick and strong in cupping his back from the back of the neck to the heel on four spots covered with a long, fine bandage, because it only appears this way.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	 And so when it appears, then you should bleed according to each part as is possible and according to the transverse [vein], which is better; either incise or dry up that part, because his place is healed.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	 And it is very common in many men; and if you find this [condition], but it doesn't seem to affect everything, then bleed some part of him, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot between the big toe and the little toe.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	 And be careful with the nerves, and let run as much blood as you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	 Then immediately unbind the ligature and place on the bleeding site cotton and firmly press the area, for it heals lightly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	 About cupping and the qualities of using them.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	 Cupping glasses are made of horn, or glass, or crystal.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	 And cupping is done in two ways: one is with scarification and bloodletting, and the other is cupping without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	 "And this puncture, which is without scarification, is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	 "And the bloodletting treatments that are administered with scarification and blood extraction have fourteen locations on the body. One of these places where bloodletting is performed is at alnocrati, which is the lower part of the head; the middle location between the two parts of the neck; bloodletting under the chin below the jaw, below the mouth; bloodletting in the area of the shoulders; bloodletting in the alohoster area, which is at the end of the ribs; bloodletting on the palms; and bloodletting on the knuckles.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	 "Bloodletting does not extract blood from the smaller veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not catch the virtue through them, as happens with phlebotomy; nor is it necessary that bloodletting be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused by congestion until the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	 "However, if necessity requires bloodletting for an illness or a chronic condition, administer it at the beginning of the month, in the middle of the month, and at the end of the month, and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	 This text appears to describe various symptoms associated with some condition or illness. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	 And thus when such events occur for any of those reasons, and especially if it is in the middle or third of the month, then order a bloodletting to be done because several hours have passed since the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	 And the reason for bloodletting from the neck is that when you apply it to the head and cause it to sink into the heels, but it should be an evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	 And this bloodletting is in the location of phlebotomy from the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	 And it is not permissible to use for this purpose one who has a complete cold or who has a catarrh, because it causes great harm to him.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	 And therefore it is not suitable to use this for the elderly, whose heads are afflicted with coldness.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	 But for one who persists in this state, forgetfulness is induced upon him; and therefore it is necessary that you command the bleeder to pause his hand slightly with the bloodletting cup after each time, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	 But bloodletting from the elbow is in the location of phlebotomy from the vena fusca and the basilic vein: and for this you apply it for asthma, for constriction of breath, for cleaving of the instrument of breath, for cough, and for congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	 And it is necessary that the ventouse be emptied a little, because if it is left there, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	 And the cupping (ventozacio) of Alhagdahan is used for pains in the head and eye pain, migraine, fever, and toothache; and it is an alternative to bloodletting from the vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	 And it's important to instruct the cupper (ventozador) not to press with scarification, so as not to cut the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	 And cupping on the chin is used for ulcers in the mouth, gum disease, and similar conditions of the mouth, and it serves as an alternative to bloodletting from the vein on the lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	 But cupping that is done on both shins is used for cataplasms, which are made to induce heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	 And cupping on the inner sides of the armpits serves as an alternative to bloodletting from three veins, which are the basilic, ulnar, and cephalic veins, because it draws blood from all the smaller veins in the flesh that connect to these larger veins until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	 And command the person performing bloodletting not to proceed too forcefully with scarification, because the area is devoid of flesh, and only nerves and arteries remain underneath.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	 And it is a cupping glass with which one performs cupping on the back and treats the hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers underneath.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	 And you should command the person performing bloodletting to use a large cupping glass and one made of tin, because the area requires strong suction; and the delicate and thin veins should be strongly scarified first.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	 However, cupping of the thighs is done more delicately, as it draws blood from the whole body, and it helps with old pains of the kidneys and liver, and bladder; and it induces menstruation, and it helps with flatulence and melancholy; and it serves as a substitute for phlebotomy of both saphenous veins, and the jugular vein, and of two cubits.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	 However, they greatly weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	 And the bloodletting of the jugular vein is similar to the bloodletting of both thighs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	 And the quality of the positioning of the cupping glasses is to place the glass at the beginning on an empty stomach and apply it with warm suction, do not prolong the positioning of the cups but place them lightly, and leave them there for a short time, so that the humors may come to the place by natural path.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	 And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the area become red and swollen, and the sign of blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	 And then you make an incision and repeat the suction gradually, and consider the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	 Because that person who has delicate skin and few pores should be incised only once and no more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	 And command the cupper to widen the incision a little and deepen it slightly, and always apply the suction gently.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	 And if the blood is thick, then you should incise twice, because in the first incision, the pathway is opened for the blood and its wateriness.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	 But in the second [incision] to ensure thorough removal of the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	 And if the blood is very foul, then a third incision should be made to remove all of it.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	 And recently, when we want to extract a little blood at a time or only a small amount, a simple incision is sufficient for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	 And if we want to extract more blood, we incise with a larger incision; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to incise through a deep incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	 And the term "scarification" refers only to the depth of the cut.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	 And if the person whose veins are thick, hard, dark, and their pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for cupping be treated with milder, more open, and more resolving substances; in summer, such as oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of sesame seed; and in winter, oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or oil of garlic, and similar substances.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	 And if the excess is thick and greasy, then the oil should be of amaranth, or oil of lemon balm, or oil of aloe, or oil of dill, and their like.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	 However, if the person has wide pores and soft skin, it is necessary that they be forbidden from using oil, and it is necessary that for this person the areas for cupping be washed with vinegar or with fatty water of salt, or with water of sesame seed, or with water of borage, and similar to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	 And that one whose blood is of excessive moisture, wash his privates with vinegar, or with water of myrtle and sumac and similar things.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	 And that one whose superfluidities are thick, wash his privates with old vinegar, or with water of hyssop (which is marjoram), or with infusion of anise, chamomile, and similar things.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	 And it is necessary that the washing be done before bathing; and it is necessary that it be administered immediately after bathing for an hour or two, and it is necessary to sleep right after the washing.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	 What must be observed in one who has been bled before a washing?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	 It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the person who will perform the washing or who should be bled is choleric and hot-blooded with sharp and inflamed blood, then it is necessary that he take cooling remedies, such as sorrels (Rumex acetosa), endive, vinegar, lettuce, dry wine, syrup of roses, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	 And let his food be like this: polenta (cornmeal mush), and the meat of lean birds, and foods seasoned with vinegar, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	 Here's the translation of your sentence:
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	 "And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and cupping, the drink should be greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	 "And it is necessary to give some men tyriaca alpharac or musk medicine, such as musk or alcelita, before bloodletting or cupping, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is subtilized; and they should not take that food.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	 "But the ventozas that are without scarification should be placed on the liver, and on the spleen and gout area, and on the navel, in the joint areas, and the hollow of the elbow, because these members cannot tolerate scarification upon them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	 "And these are not desired for any other purpose than to draw blood from a member, just as they place a ventosa on the breast in cases of nosebleed; and this is used so that the harsh viscous swelling of the member is dissolved, such as when placed on the abdomen and navel; because this rarifies the member and removes the pain, resolving the swelling.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	 "And it has been placed on the hemorrhoids when they occur in their inflammation or ulcer, because by virtue of its strong attraction, it quickly heals the inflammation and eradicates the ulcer from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	 "Similarly, when flatulence is trapped in the liver or spleen.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	 "These flatulences should be treated only with suction, and sometimes they may also require heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	 "And sometimes they are administered filled with warm water to patients with liver ailments.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	 "And the reason for filling and increasing the size of the bladder is that it should contain only hot water or water in which appropriate herbs have been cooked.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	 "Method of administering bladder with heat: the width of the orifice should be two fingers, as we have formed it; and the amount of air should be about half a palmful; and on the side of the patient, in the lower part of the abdomen, the incision should be small, just enough to insert a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	 "It should be made of thick, smooth ram's horn or citrus peel, so that it does not disturb the position of the limb on which it is placed.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	 "And in the middle of this, a transverse iron or steel rod should be inserted, on which a candle with fire is placed.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	 "And this bladder should be much larger than the one we have described, and smaller according to the patient's condition and the state of their ailment.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	 And the bloodletting for children and the weak is different from that of young people and those with larger bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	 And the way to place this bloodletting tool with fire on a limb is to spread the cloth with a decent amount of wood ash in front of a few beeswax candles, and place it in the middle of the transverse vertebra at the midpoint of the bloodletting site, so that the fire is lit around the lower part to prevent the patient's body from being burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	 Then it should be placed on the patient's limb, and the finger should be on the hole we mentioned, until when we have the bloodletting tools ready and do not need to remove the finger and let the steam out over that hole, then the bloodletting tool will dissolve immediately.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	 And ignite the cloth according to its method, and repeat this if you need to.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	 However, in the case of bloodletting for pleurisy, it is done with water, which does not have a transverse vertebra or hole, and it should only be placed on the patient's limb once it is filled with water.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	 And this is its form: And the larger this bloodletting tool is, the better, as it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	 Chapter XCVII.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	 Bloodsuckers are not applied to all members but only to those in which the placement of cupping glasses is not possible due to their small size, such as the hands and gums and similar parts; or to a member that lacks flesh, such as the foot and the nose and similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	 And the quality of using those bloodsuckers that you have found in clean, standing water.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	 And let them be laid in clean water day and night until they are lethargic, ensuring that there is no remnant in their stomachs; and beforehand the body should be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and cupping glasses; and then rub the patient's member until it becomes red; and then place them on the patient.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	 And when they are full and fall off.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	 And if it is possible to suck out the place with a cupping glass, it is more useful for healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	 And otherwise, wash the place with vinegar and then with warm water; and then rub and squeeze it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	 And if the body's blood is prolonged near the placement of the bloodsuckers, and it oozes out, then you should dip a cloth in warm water and place it on top until the oozing subsides.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	 And if the blood is in abundance, then powder vitriol or other astringent substances over the area until the blood is stopped; or place cooked fava beans on the area and let them stay until they stick to the area and the blood is stopped.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	 And it is necessary, if possible, to use leeches for bloodletting.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	 And if leeches are not available, then wash the area with fresh blood or place a needle in the area until it draws blood; and then place something on it, for they quickly draw blood when they sense any blood.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	 And if you want them to fall off, powder a little bit of crushed aloe, or salt, or ashes over them, and they will fall off quickly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	 Thus begins the prologue of the third section: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	 This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of bone fractures and dislocations.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	 Oh son, know that this chapter is boasted about by foolish doctors and the common people who have never read or studied the books of the ancients.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	 And because of this reason, it is done that this method of the scientists in our land is hidden; and I have not forgotten it at any time whatsoever; and I have not applied it after, except for the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study on their understanding, until I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	 And then I directed my attention to experiments and studies throughout my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	 And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and on which my experiments have passed; since I have shortened this for you others and delivered it from the length of explanation; and I have shortened it to the end of shortening; and shown it at the end of explanation; and formed in it many forms of the instruments used in it, as is done by addition of explanation, just as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	 Chapter One.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	 Summary and collections on the nature of bone fractures, and those necessary preliminaries before we begin to recall the memories of broken limbs and various parts of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	 Therefore, let us say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the subject matter; and the chapters at the understanding of which in the beginning is essential for the craftsmen and placed on the truth of these; so it shall be with you and those who are skilled or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	 And so I say that when an accident occurs such as a fracture, dislocation, twisting or falling, it is necessary for you to begin with phlebotomy or leeching of the affected area, or both at the same time, unless there is some prohibiting cause, such as weakness in virtue, if the patient is a child or an elderly person in decline, or if it is extremely hot or cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	 And so it should be satisfied with a diet of fresh herbs and birds' meat and crabs; and avoid heavy meats and filling oneself with all kinds of food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of the absence of an abscess, and if you do not fear the loss of matter from the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	 And then return the patient to their previous diet with which they are accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	 And so when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary for the patient to be fed nutritious foods that are rich and heavy, containing viscosity, such as foods made from boiled wheat, rice, cabbage, peas, ox tripe, beans, fresh fish, fatty meats and similar ones. And with this diet, the healing of the fracture is done more gently and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	 And you should know that broken bones in the elderly and infirm cannot be healed or mended according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	 And they are always healed and mended according to their nature due to the dryness of those limbs, and those that are in the end of their youth are also healed and mended, just like the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	 However, nature always adjusts and connects over the broken bone from any similar cause, like glue in which it becomes thick and adheres and strengthens that until they are completely bonded together, until they reach the end of strength and firmness, just as fire at first, until some cause prevents it from its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And for this reason, it is necessary to place food on the patient's table, foods that are heavy, sticky, and thick, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	 The severity of the break varies according to the variety of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	 And know that the types of breaks are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a break in the thigh bone is different from a break in the skull bone; and a break in the foot bone is different from a break in the hand bone; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	 Based on the context provided, "Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa" likely means:
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	 Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence into English:
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given line:
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	 "Mota senhal de fractura del os" translates to:
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	 And by this it is known to be a bone fracture: it is crookedness of the bone, and swelling and prominence of the area felt, and so it is when we press on that area with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	 Therefore, when there is neither evident crookedness in the area nor pain felt upon your touch, and the patient does not experience great pain when you shake the bone, then it is not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	 However, it is possible that it may be a minor crookedness or small fissure, which should not be moved with your hand and by compression of the whole area; rather, place on him remedies of the kind that are remembered at this moment, which are suitable for the area; and then bind tightly with a fine bandage.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	 And know that the area, when it is bent and not split in two or anything else happens to it, as all parts are removed from their place, then it is necessary for you to begin immediately with the correction of it, having that which occurs in it an abscess be cautious.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	 And if an abscess forms, then leave it alone for several days until the abscess subsides; and then drain it in whatever way you can with lightness and skill.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	 And know that restoration and healing of it is easier than for the bone in which this happens.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	 Then strengthen that second one, so that the memory of him may return.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	 But if the satis is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member into two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; with your hand if the member is small; or with two ropes or one rope and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	 And be your position with which you place the broken member so equal according to its natural figure, while the parts of the broken member are extended, then you must make those additions return with ingenuity and in each way that you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	 And be careful according to your strength that nothing happens to the patient because of your operation, causing pain or injury; and do everything in your power to apply one bone with its companion in the best way possible.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	 And it is necessary that at that time you touch it with your hand, and if you see here any different cause, correct it and make it equal according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	 And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish doctors do, who cause many things to happen wrongly because of their operation, or cause the member to become contracted, as we have seen this happen because of the operation of their excessive vigilance.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	 And immediately connect (the patient) to appropriate and decent treatment and restriction of that limb, along with rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and ensure they do not move it during their vigils and sleep, and observe its rotation and agitation, and control all their movements with all their strength; and wait to see if the position of the limb is such that pain is guaranteed, because when one feels in the disposition of the position of the limb either pain or injury; then it is necessary to change that to another disposition where they do not feel pain; and ensure that this position is straight and equal, so that the limb does not become twisted when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	 And the quality of the restraint on the quiet limb is as follows: you should know that broken limbs are diverse in their smallness and largeness, and in their form.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	 And for those that are small, such as the arm and leg and foot, and those similar to them, it is necessary that the wrapping be of soft cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	 But for those that are large, such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary that there be a firm and hard wrapping, because a firm wrapping holds the large limb strongly on all sides with an equal restriction, so that in it no bruise may enter.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	 And then begin, just before your evacuation of excrement, to apply appropriate bandages to that place of the fracture with three or four wraps, depending on the size of the limb; and strengthen your hand slightly with the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	 And then come to that part of the body above the location of the fracture, and strengthen it so that your bandage does not slip from where you have secured the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	 And then extend yourself with another wrap on the location of the fracture, and gradually loosen the bandage slightly until you can take hold of the limb.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	 And then take another bandage and wrap it a second time over the broken place, and then come to the bandages below the fracture; and let your operation be in the strength of the bandage and in loosening that, as we have said above in the first wrapping.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	 And then place between the layers of cotton wool or cloth with which you have enveloped the irregularity of the fracture, if there is any irregularity; and if not, do not put anything in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	 And then place another bandage on top, and then envelop it immediately with decent-looking strips of linen, if there is no swelling or abscess in the place, and then place upon it that which draws out the abscess and removes the swelling; and leave it like this for a few days; and then strengthen over it with the strips.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	 And let the bed's legs be of hollow cane, and well-formed with skill; or they may be of pinewood; or of palm tree trunks; and each leg's width should correspond to this form and this figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	 But it is necessary that the leg placed on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the other legs, and the length of the leg according to the size and smallness of the limb; and then strengthen over the legs with another bandage according to your first binding; and then bind on top with a decent bandage according to what we have said about binding, and it is that your binding should be closer to the fracture site, and the farther it is from the fracture, the tighter the binding.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	 And it is necessary that the threads are finer in thickness and delicacy, and they should be of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen through the operation of some foolish people placing their threads with ropes of tortoise shell, which is a great mistake, for the binding would not be equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	 And also, very fine threads are not suitable, because you will not achieve with those what you want through binding, and it is not necessary that there be more than a finger's width between leg and leg.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	 And if the patient is bitten by the extremities of the stars near the constriction in their place, then place under those a piece of wool or flannel until it does not cause harm to them.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	 Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by a wound, and there is a rupture in the tendon, and I will recall that in the following chapter according to its specificity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	 And know that never all the broken limb is covered with stars on the first day; the reason being that when the limb is large, it is not fitting to put stars on it until after five days or seven, or more, according to your certainty of avoiding pus cautiously.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	 And this is the manner of plasters with which the Ancients restored [limbs], which are placed on fractures and dislocations and sprains.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	 Method of plaster for the restoration of fractures, suitable for many situations and especially for women and children, because it does not cause heat or cold: and that you take powder from a mill, and it is the fine part of the flour that adheres to the movement of the mill on the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	 Based on the given text and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	 This text appears to be describing another method for creating an emplaster (a type of poultice or plaster) used to treat fractures, dislocations, and sprains. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	 Another method of making a plaster to apply to fractures and contusions: take 10 parts of white lead, 5 parts of myrrh, 6 parts of aloe, and 20 parts of Armenian bole.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	 All of these should be ground in a mortar with some vinegar, then sieved and mixed with water or egg white, and applied.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	 Method of making a plaster for dislocated joints and bones that have left their places, and where pain occurs in those areas, as well as in cracks and fractures: take raw wool and soak it in vinegar and melted fat, then place it on the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	 However, this plaster has no virtue of restoration, but rather it cleanses pus and relieves pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	 Another method of making a plaster that restores broken bones: take the leaves of a wild fig tree and the leaves of wild poppy; grind them all together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	 A brief method of administering a plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to resolve any remaining pus: take equal parts of white lead, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, and bran; grind them all together and mix with vinegar if the member is not broken.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	 But if it is scraped, then treat it with water of celery or with water and use a compress on it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	 Another method of plaster that is stronger in resolution than the previous one, when a hard abscess occurs for the restoration of the member: take seeds of mallow and linden, balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, all equally divided and weighed; everything should be ground and mixed with water of willow or soft water or wine, all according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	 But Hippocrates does not say in his book that a plaster should be placed on the broken member for its restoration, but rather a cerate made of wax and oil and nothing else; and he advises that it be mixed between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	 But in Gaul it has been seen that plasters are placed on the broken member for its restoration and the causes of desiccation with a little heat, such as myrrh, resin, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	 Method of plaster that you will make for injury and pain: take equal parts of honey, seeds, shorn sheep's wool or feathers of a bird, mallow, and salt; all should be ground and sieved and mixed together to make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	 The sentence you provided seems to be discussing a specific medical procedure related to dislocation or splinting. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	 If severe pain or swelling or inflammation occurs in the area, then you should immediately cut or release it at that moment, and remove the plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	 Then take a piece of cloth and a marine sponge moistened with warm water, and immerse it in tepid water, and with that wash the area until the swelling stops and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place on it wool saturated with vinegar and oil or rosemary oil, and bind it to the limb for a night until you are sure of cauterizing the abscess, and the inflammation of the limb subsides, and its pain is relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then repeat that gentle binding and small plaster, and do not make it too tight with your first constriction, and continue with it until healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	 And if you see that the abscess, redness, pain, and inflammation, along with all the other symptoms, have been completely relieved, and you no longer need a plaster or binding, then continue doing so as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	 And if nothing happens to the limb from those causes that we have mentioned, then do not release it until after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes this is left for twenty days, depending on how you see the release of the limb, as we have said, so that the fracture adheres, and the flesh coagulates over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	 And then adjust the stricture more than in your previous stricture entirely, and adjust it according to the thickness of the patient's food, as is remembered beforehand.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	 But if you see the location of the fracture is already dry and withered more than is necessary, then know that the nourishment is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, moisten that area with tepid water always when you clean it; and let this continue for three days entirely; slightly relieve the stricture, and through this operation, the nourishment will reach the limb, and it will be healed somewhat.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	 But what the foolish restorers of a fractured limb do another time when it is not restored at the beginning as it should be, and is restored crookedly, is an error according to their operation, and a great fear. And if this were done correctly, the Ancients would have written about it in their books and they would have acted accordingly.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	 And I have not seen anyone do this, which is why it is more reasonable that it should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	 Chapter Two: Of Fractures that Occur in the Head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	 The types of fractures are many, and their shapes are varied, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures occur from the blow of a weapon, and the blow breaks all the bone into the splinter, which is under the bone, just as it does in a beam; and because of this, this type is called "ascal." Or the weapon cuts off some part of the bone, and cuts off its flesh without cutting through to the other side; and this type of fracture is called "levatio absoluta.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	 And the injury from these two fractures is either great or small, and it can be caused by a blow with a stick or falling on a rock; the cause of this is striking with a stick or falling on a stone.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	 And this fracture is either penetrating, approaching the skin that lies under the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone, and the injury from these two fractures is either great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	 And this type of fracture occurs within the bone, in the fineness of the small hair, and for this reason it is called a capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	 And this fracture is caused by falling or striking with a stone, which forces some layer of the bone into the broken parts inside, and it occurs in the concave place as happens to earthenware pots when they are struck and break from their entry point to the broken parts inside.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	 And this is most commonly found in the bones of children, such as the skulls of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	 And for all these types of stable fractures, they are bad like stars separated from each other.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	 And I will return with a reminder of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	 And recognize all these types of fractures by detection and investigation, testing them and removing the decaying flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	 And a capillary type of fracture is recognized by this: it is discovered on the bone, and it is washed and anointed with oil on it, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	 However, in the treatment of fractures, consider first the patient's symptoms, and if you see by the symptoms that there is a clear indication of fear, such as vomiting from anger, extension [of the limb], loss of consciousness, hoarseness of voice, fainting, high fever, discharge from the eyes and redness of them, and similar symptoms in more serious conditions, it should not be doubted that he is not cured.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	 And if you see non-serious symptoms, you hope for health, then you begin to treat him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	 The cause is that if the patient has come to you in the early stages of the illness, as it was in the days of winter, then you should consider removing the bone before the fourteenth day according to all indications.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	 And if it is in the days of summer, then you should consider removing the bone before the seventh day, having that which is under the bone become corrupted by flesh, and that the symptoms we have mentioned occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	 "And if the fracture has reached the subcutaneous tissue covering the skull and is with small fragments and attrition, then it is necessary to suture the comminuted and attritional fragment, as I will instruct you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	 "And it is that you should shave the patient's head where there is a wound, and expose the bone according to your custom and skill, as best as you can based on the appearance of the wound, and be gentle with the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	 "And if you notice the detection of bone, flows of blood or pus, then you should apply what is necessary to it, and that is to fill the area with cloth soaked in wine and oil, and make the wound rest until the pus subsides and you are sure of the blood flow; and then begin with the sawing of the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	 "And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "And one method is that you should cut the bone with a narrow saw like this, and its shape is as follows: And then you should use another saw, slightly wider than the first; and its shape is as follows:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	 "And then use the widest saw of the three.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	 And it is necessary that you have various types of scissors, some of which are sharper than others, and some of which are shorter than the others, and they should be at the end of sharpness of their points, and they should be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	 And use them with ease in striking the scissors so that you do not cut the head and wound the patient.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	 And if the bone is hard and strong, then it is necessary to pierce around it before you administer the scissors with the pincers, which are called non-piercing pincers.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	 And they are not called thus only because those do not pierce the end of the bone to that which is near it, but also because the pincer has a round tip or edge on that which is below its sharp point, similar to a small margin or circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	 And it is convenient that you take a great number of these pincers, each one suitable for the thickness of each bone, until you have all the bones of the skull with pointed ends, the length and width of which are according to the thickness of this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	 And this is the method for three types of trepans: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the trepan on the bone and turn it with your said fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the trepan to another place, and insert it so that it passes through the entire thickness of the bone or near it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	 And then you cut with scissors that which is between each crack of the bone, and make it as thin as possible over that, in order to remove the bone, either with your hand or for some other reason with certain instruments that you will have prepared for this purpose, such as tweezers and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	 And it is necessary that you take care with all caution that the scissors do not touch any part of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	 And once you have circled and perforated the bone, and if it is attached to the brain, and you have extracted it, it is necessary that you scrape and peel off that which is on the bone with another similar instrument, but however, it is necessary that it be thinner and more delicate than the other scissors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	 This sentence seems to discuss the treatment of small bone fragments or splinters. Here's my line-by-line translation:
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Here is the line-by-line translation of the given medieval medical text into English:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	 Based on the provided text and similarity to Romance languages, here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	 And then strike the incision of a wound with a small hammer until you have cut through all the bone with ease, as if it were turned, and be sure that no accident happens to the skin which you fear in any way. And if the patient is asleep or unconscious, certainly, even if he is the most foolish and ignorant of all men;
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	 Then if there is any attached cause of the bone to the skin in some bony areas, cut it away with the pointed end of the knife and remove it with ease, for it will be removed without harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	 And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the skin, and what is cut or removed from the bone is its surface, and roughness and fine splinters remain, then you should shave off that roughness and remove those splinters with fine razors, which you have prepared in various quantities so that it is possible for you to use them in the most appropriate places and the most correct ones according to where your operation leads you with that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	 And you should use in your razor the sharpest of those razors to initially shave the bone, and then use the next sharpest one, continuing this process until you have used all the way up to the sharpest and finest of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	 In each of the other small fractures and subtle fractures, it is necessary to administer care according to what has been lost for its correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	 And it is because it cannot be applied to all who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	 This concerns what we have shown in the case of large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	 And if the skin is torn when you remove the bone, then take cloth according to the size of the wound and soak it in olive oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; and then take another cloth, folded or tripled, and soak it in wine and olive oil and place it over the first cloth, and press as lightly as you can on that, so as not to compress the flesh; and then apply a bandage of linen, and do not bind it tightly except according to the size of the wound alone.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	 Leave it with this treatment for one day or two until you are sure that the abscess has been cauterized; and then unbind it and then administer medicines which cause superfluous dryness, such as linseed and powder of violets and of saffron, and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	 And it is that you make from these medicines a powder that should be sprinkled over the wound, as they are dry; and generally, administer to them all medicine of a nature that washes away and does not cause irritation.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	 And be careful according to your skill that the wound in your care is clean; and there is no residue of ointment or anything else on it; and do not allow virulence to accumulate in it; for when it is pressed against the brain's membrane, it corrupts it and poisons it, and this causes a malignant evil to happen to the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	 And it happens in the cavity of the head, when its bone is exposed and especially when its care is neglected, and it appears black on its surface; and therefore consider if these accidents happen to the patient as we have said, know that it is harmful without any doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 And if blackness does not occur from the medicine placed on it, and it is due to that medicine causing blackness, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and with these oint a cloth, and then place that on the cavity; and then treat it with the spices of healing that are necessary until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	 Chapter III
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	 Of the restoration of the nose when it is crushed.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	 Know that the nose is not broken unless both superior parts are fractured at the same time, or if one of them is slightly affected, because there are two bones in it; the lower part is cartilaginous and cannot be broken, so only bruising, crookedness, and narrowing occur.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	 However, if one of the two parts is broken, then you should insert the said little finger into his nose and close that fracture inside with your index finger, and push it back outward with your thumb until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	 And do this carefully to avoid causing more pain to the patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	 And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be straightened with the tip of a reed that has been cut to an appropriate length.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	 And if the fracture is in both parts, then you should do the same thing.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	 And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, you should give him a break from treatment for seven or ten days until the inflammation subsides.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	 And then insert a cloth made of linen into the tip of the nose. If the fracture is in one piece, place two splints. If the fracture is in two pieces, let it be in the larger splint of sufficient quantity to fill the nasal cavity.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	 And thus say some of the ancient restorers that the splints should be wrapped in wool and changed daily, but I have not seen this. It is necessary that the cloth be wrapped in egg white mixed with powdered chalk; and then leave the splint until the bone has set and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	 And sometimes it is necessary to insert into the nose, instead of a splint, a needle wrapped in linen cloth; and if the patient has a severe nosebleed and is unable to breathe.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	 And this method is not always necessary; you can choose whether to use the needle wrapped in linen or splints.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	 And if an abscess forms, apply a plaster to the nose with cotton or cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	 But if an abscess does not form, then it is necessary to apply a plaster on the outside with sesame flour and sandalwood powder mixed with egg white; and then place a linen cloth over it, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	 "But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed, then it is necessary to cut into those areas and extract the pieces with suitable instruments; then close the incision, and treat it with water that promotes healing and solidification, and with suitable bandages.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	 "And if an injury occurs inside the nose, then it is necessary to treat that with ointments and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	 Chapter IV
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	 "On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	 "When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not due to an injury, consider if the fracture is only on the outside and not broken into two pieces and curved inward at the breaks, then its recognition is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	 "And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the said index finger of the right hand; and with that, push inward the swelling of the fracture towards the breaks outside, with your other hand on the outside part of the bone; with that you can evenly position it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	 "And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension of both parts according to correct alignment until it is possible to join them.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	 "And if you encounter disruption of teeth, strengthen those which you expect to remain with wire of gold or silver or thread; and then place on the broken jaw a wax cloth, and then place on it a double-layered cloth, and place on the large cloth a star-shaped device made properly, or a sole plate equal in length to the jaw; and then bind it above according to how you are skilled in binding it and as appropriate for application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	 "And instruct the patient to rest and remain calm, and give them only thin and light food.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	 "And if you think that the figure has already been altered in some way, then you wait and unbind it on the third day; and then correct what has been altered from it and apply a plaster to it with powder of millstone, egg white, or sesame flour, after you have removed the wax from it, and place over the plaster a thin wool cloth.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	 And so when that plaster is attached and secured to the patient, and the position of the bone has not been altered, let it remain in place until the fracture heals and strengthens; for many times this fracture heals in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	 And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said many times for the treatment of it until it is healed and the abscess has been removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	 And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider whether it is a piece of bone that has been separated or splinters, then you should be careful to remove those splinters with an instrument suitable for the removal of such.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should widen it with a fleambotomy according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	 And then when you have removed those splinters and nothing more can be taken out, if the opening of the wound is wide, close it; and if not, place one of the appropriate plasters on it and heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	 Chapter V
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	 On the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	 Based on the provided text and context, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	 Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	 And the procedure in that case, when there is no open wound, is to have two assistants present. One should hold the splint and follow the broken collarbone, while the other extends the neck towards that side.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	 And then bandage the fracture with the aforementioned things until its form is restored as needed, and there is neither prominence nor concavity in it.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	 And if more extension is needed, then place a pillow or wool blanket under the patient's shoulder according to your necessity; extend and raise the collarbone and shorten the support with your hand until you bandage the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	 And if you cannot pull the end of the collarbone towards the sides outside, because it has reached the chest, then the patient should be made to lie on their back with their neck supported, and place a medium-sized cushion on their chest muscles.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	 And the assistant should press on the patient's chest muscles towards the sides until the collarbone bone is raised above the chest, and then you straighten the fracture and bandage it with the aforementioned things.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	 If you feel splinters in your throat and they are irritating, it is necessary to cut over that area and extract those splinters easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if it is lodged in the bone, then you should ingeniously make an incision with one of the incisions you have prepared for this purpose, after having placed under the throat the instrument that serves to remove [it]; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and its form is as follows:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	 It resembles a spoon, and this is its hollow part; and let its length be according to what you need from it, depending on the size of the bone or its smallness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	 But let the length of it be according to what is possible for you in the operation; that it has two ends like this, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	 And if the rupture of the wound which you have cut when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide and you are certain of an abscess forming, then you should join the two lips of the wound with a stitch.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	 And if the rupture is small or you fear an abscess forming, then you should fill the wound with cloth and poultices according to the size of the wound's cut.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	 And if an abscess bursts, then soak a cloth in vinegar and rose oil mixed with honey, and place it on the affected area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	 And if there is a narrowing of the bone due to a wound or dryness, you should place a poultice made from ground flour mixed with egg white on it. Then place a clean cloth over it and another cloth under the patient's armpit if needed, and take a thin wooden board whose length is three times its width or similar; then wrap it in cloth and wrap that cloth with the board around the fracture site; then place cushions as described above, and roll it over the patient's neck and under their armpits, ensuring that it covers all affected areas. This should be done until the narrowing of the fracture subsides, and this is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	 And be careful not to put the board directly on the broken bone; therefore, you should check the patient every day, and when the bandage becomes soft or you notice that the board has been lifted, then you should adjust it and strengthen the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	 And then place the pillow of the patient under their neck, and place a small cushion between their legs during the night; so that with this, the helper of the patient is elevated on one side, and thus the fracture of the collarbone is raised by muscle elevation; or tie the arms of the patient to their neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	 And do not untie the bandage unless there is an abscess or pus in that place within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	 And then renew the bandage if you see his face turning red, and adjust it in the stricture to restore that place, leaving it until the collarbone fracture is restored and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	 And he should be strengthened and comforted according to the moon in twenty-eight days, and sometimes it takes longer in some men.
Capitol .vi.	 Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	 Of the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	 The scapula is broken in the left side of him, and it is not broken in him but at the edges (margins).
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	 And thus when it is broken in him — and it is broken in the middle of him — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture force it into place and reduce it to its natural shape in every way possible with skill that you have.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	 "However, if the spoon is concave in some places on the handle, then you fill that concavity with wax from a lion's head, and then you adjust the spoon according to its equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	 "Then you strengthen it with a human tongue, tied tightly and firmly fixed, so that it is not dislodged from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	 "And examine the bandage every day; and whenever it is found to be softened, bind it again with another bandage, and straighten and level the spoon if it has been dislodged from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	 "And lay the patient on his left side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	 "And the spoon is restored in 20 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	 "And thus when this number is completed, then you remove the bandage, and know for certain that this pertains to the bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	 "And if it proceeds from the bone place, and you put a bandage underneath, then you cut over it, remove it, and act as we said in the case of the fracture of the furcula (wishbone) or aposteme (abscess) if something happens here.
Capitol .vii.	 "Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	 "On the healing of a broken foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	 The foot may sometimes break in its middle part and this delays healing; but the extremities of it move quickly because they are hardened and broken up.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	 "And its symptoms when the middle part is broken are that it inclines toward internal parts and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, rapid pulse, and vomiting blood; and this condition is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	 "And its treatment is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a pillow put under their shoulders; and then press on their muscles, and adjust their ribs with two hands, and be delicate in the operation and balance according to every possible manner and what is suitable for it, until the shape of the bone returns as needed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	 "And then place over it a plaster and bandage, and on top of that a thin wooden board made of willow or hazel, or similar light material; after wrapping it in cloth; and then be delicate in tying this to the broken bone so that it is not too tight; and go around it with bandages according to the roundness of the back several times, and secure it with a decent tie; and then pay attention to the binding at all times, and when it becomes softened, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	 And if necessity provokes the removal of that corrupt or purulent matter, or pain, or abscess that occurs in that place, then you should cut and clean it, remove the plaster, and treat what happens with appropriate care; and then return the plaster, if it fits the surface; and apply a tight bandage until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	 Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	 Regarding the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	 Know that the fracture of ribs occurs only in large areas such as the back; and at their ends, on the front side, contusions do not occur there unless they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	 And his condition is not hidden from feeling by the investigation of him with these words.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	 And the restoration should be done in such a way that it encloses the fracture with these things according to the possible manner, until it is healed as needed, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bones with steel, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	 And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the inside parts, then it causes the patient severe pain and puncturing, like the puncture that occurs in someone who has pleurisy, because the bones penetrate the membrane; and it causes difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	 And already the Ancients have described it with ingenious words.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	 And of these things they said: it is necessary to place foods on the patient that cause inflammation and gas, so that the stomach may swell and stretch, and the break may be pushed outwards towards the parts outside.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	 However, we should be careful with this, lest it causes the formation of a hard abscess, if it does not happen; and if it does happen, then it will already help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	 And some of them said that it should be placed on the stomach and then sucked with force; and this seems reasonable, but nevertheless it is feared that the suction will draw the impurities to the place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	 And some of them said: it is necessary to cover the place with wool that has already been soaked in hot oil, and cushions should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the bandage may be equal when wrapped around according to its roundness; and then the patient should be treated with a diet of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	 And if the patient experiences severe pain that cannot be endured, and the bone pierces the skin with a tooth-like point, fear for the patient arises. In this case, it is necessary to make an incision over the place, uncover the broken rib, and then place on it the instrument which preserves the hollow [or cavity], the description of which has been given above; and by this means the bone will be more easily extracted.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	 And now, we adjust the two lips of the wound. If it is large, use stitching, and treat it with dressings until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	 And if an abscess occurs internally, then cut it open and pour powdered oil into the wound, place a dressing over it, and let the patient be treated with water that is appropriate for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	 And have him lie on his back on the side where he usually sleeps until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	 Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	 Of the restoration of a fracture in the spine, the back, and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	 Sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and later it affects their joints, similarly with the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	 And if this happens to someone and you want to know whether he will heal or not, consider this: If his hands are already softened, numbed, paralyzed, and cannot move them nor stretch or strengthen them, and when you squeeze those hands with your fingers or prick them with a needle and he feels no pain, then you should know that he is not healing, and in the same disposition it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	 And if he moves them and feels constriction with the fingers and needle, then you should know that the bone of the neck is saved and that the patient will heal with care.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	 And if you see the vertebrae of the neck looking like this and you want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider the patient's feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	 Then if you see that they are already swollen, do to them what is done on the hands, and then when he lies on his back, he will have difficulty breathing and defecating without his will, and sometimes he lies on his back and wants to urinate but cannot. Know then that it is fatal, and therefore do not work on his cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	 But if none of these causes occur, the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	 And his cure is that you make a hole for the discharge of the pus and place over the affected vertebra olive oil mixed with sun alone, or with mugwort; place it there several times a day until the pus is drained.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	 Then place one of the comforting and healing plasters, and strengthen it with a bandage; and order the patient to rest and be calm and not to sleep on the side where he finds pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	 And if it happens that the fracture of the small bone or any other cause is separated from him, then it is necessary to dry on the cord and take out that bone; and then join the two lips of the wound with sutures if it is large; and then cure it with some healing ointment until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	 Based on the given context and the pattern of translation from the similar text, here's a line-by-line translation into English:
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	 If you feel broken shards within them, then pierce through that area and remove the fragments, and heal the wound with the treatment that is prescribed until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	 Capital Ten
De restauracio de la ancha.	 On the restoration of the soul.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	 The bones of the ankles are often broken, and if they break, the fracture is only in the extremities of those bones and extends along their length; they also move apart within. When this happens to a patient, there is pain in that area and a puncture, and the leg becomes numb when it is fractured.  The text appears to be discussing symptoms of ankle fractures.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	 And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that until it is above the fracture which is its shape.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	 And if the fracture is only in the extremity of it, then you enclose that according to what appears suitable by equal enclosure until it resembles its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	 However, if the fracture is in the length where it has already moved apart, then you make the patient lie on their back until you are ready to restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	 And then when you have enclosed that, place a plaster on it, and then place a splint of wood or rope over it, and bind tightly so that you do not fear a break in the fracture or displacement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	 And fill the cavity with water so that it reaches the stricture equally, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	 But if a cold abscess appears, then cease from extending and restoring it until the cold abscess is settled. Place water over it so that it settles as previously described; then return to restoring it, and strengthen it as needed.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	 And if this occurs in the shinbones or they are broken, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter XI
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	 On restoring a break in the thighbone.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	 The thighbone is that which is between the hip and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	 And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways. The first way is for you to take a flat stick, medium-sized, like this:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	 And let there be two strings attached to its ends, and then suspend it from a high place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	 Then let the patient sit on a chair, and then throw out their broken arm onto the stick until it reaches the midpoint of the stick's curve, where the bent part is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	 Based on the given translation pattern and context, let's break down the sentence line by line:
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	 Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	 If you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the break with one bandage and over that with another bandage, and each of the two assistants should extend their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	 So if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then half of the bandage should be placed over the heel and the other half below the fracture towards the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	 Similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow, then the bandage should be placed over that location and over the elbow as well.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	 Apply that with ease and without difficulty, and when it is applied as needed, and properly secured by good application, then strengthen that if an abscess does not form.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	 But if an abscess does form, then leave the constriction in place for seven days, and place wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil over it until the abscess subsides, and then you may strengthen that.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	 And the way to strengthen that is to place a poultice over the fracture, and then wrap it with a linen bandage; and then attach the arm to the support, and place your open hand over the affected muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	 And then use of needles.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	 And place on the fracture that needle which is more fine and stronger than the other needles; and place between each needle the width of a finger, and let the length of the needles be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	 Then strengthen the needles with the binding that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	 And make sure that your binding on the place of the fracture is tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	 And the longer the fracture, the less binding should be used.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	 And thus, if you see the arrangement of the needles and the binding in this way as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper place, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if you fear an abscess forming, then leave the binding and needles in place for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	 And also consider the bandage in all directions for three days, so that swelling or inflammation does not occur in the place; or it is prohibited that food reaches the limb by the disposition of excess tightness; and therefore rectify everything according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	 But if you are confident that none of this will happen, then do not remove the bandage until after three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	 And let the patient's sleep be upon their back, and their hands should be on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	 And place a thick cushion full of wool on it [the broken limb], and be mindful at all hours of the night or day that the shape of the broken limb is not distorted or dissolved, nor is the bandage softened; therefore, correct this with all your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	 And place the patient's food according to the order that we have given previously, so that the food is light at the beginning until it begins to strengthen; then it is necessary to make the food of the patient heavier.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	 Because it is customary for the adjutor and the thigh to be strengthened in forty days; therefore, they should be loosened, and a bath should be administered, and it should be treated with ointments that rectify this.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	 And if the fracture is close to being healed, then you should not loosen from that limb and the bandages until after fifteen days or two months.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter XII
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	 On the restoration of a fractured arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	 The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and radius; one of these is small, and it is called the thumb, and the other is large and is placed under the thumb, closer to the bottom.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	 And if only the large or small fire is broken quickly and they are both extinguished together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	 And when the small fire is broken on top, its restoration is swift, and its healing is even swifter.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	 And when the fire within him breaks below, his fracture is bad, and his healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	 And worse than that is when two bones are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	 Therefore, if the broken bone is the small fire above, it is suitable for the doctor to use a small extension with ease until that one is enclosed.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	 But if it is the large fire that has been extinguished, then a more vigorous extension should be used.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	 And if both fires are extinguished together, then you must use the strongest extraction.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	 And it is necessary that you place the hand figure for restoration and extend its extension on a cushion, and the palm of the hand should be on the sides above, as well as all the others, and let the auricular be lower than the others, and let the patient sit on a low chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	 And place a cushion in front of them on the bed or chest, so that the patient does not encounter labor.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	 And next, the minister should extend the arm of the affected side with his hand or with a bandage, and another minister should do the same above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	 And then the doctor should wrap the bones until they are reduced in the best possible form.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	 And if there is a fracture of the bone, then you should perforate all the flesh in its place with your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	 And if it appears that the fracture is separated so that it touches the tendons and you do not hope for its recovery, then you cut over it and remove that [piece] according to the manner we mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	 But if the fracture is with a wound, I have already made a special chapter about it, so take care of that [wound] first.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	 And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your reduction, then you should line a cloth with a plaster made of rose oil and white wax, which is halfway between fineness and strength, and wrap a tight, fine bandage over it until the abscess has subsided; then remove the plaster and place a prepared poultice of flour and egg white on it, and then place scales; and let the scale that is placed on that fracture be wider and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	 And then you place your pressure on the site of the fracture more strongly and vigorously, and when the pressure is closer to the top part of the fracture or the lower part of it, apply a little more moisture according to what was mentioned earlier in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and the bandage with which it is held together should be of medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	 And observe the limb and the bandage closely for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	 And if any cause occurs which requires correction, such as swelling that affects the limb, and then it is necessary to soak the limb in warm water until the swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	 And leave the limb uncovered until it rests, and then apply the pressure again.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	 And if the pressure has softened and the bone has moved and appears as it should, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	 And consider if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to an excess of pressure, for then it is necessary to soften that (pressure) a little and leave it for some days until the nourishment reaches there, and then strengthen it again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	 If the patient does not experience any of the causes we mentioned, then it is unnecessary to release him within approximately 20 days or around that time frame.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	 And the patient's hand should be suspended by its ability to make agitated movements, and let them sleep on their side.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	 And know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or in xxxii days, or if it is a simple fracture, it is restored in xxviii days, and all of this depends on the complexity of the injury and the strength of the patient.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	 On the restoration of finger fractures of the hand and toes.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	 Know that in the fingers of the hand and in the tips of the toes, it is common for there to be a slight fracture, and this does not happen unless there are many bruises visible.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	 And when the hand experiences a fracture or bruise, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their side and in front of them place a board equal to the length of the arm, and then place the hand on that board extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	 And then the assistant should straighten the broken bones and the doctor should bandage them until they are well set in a good cast.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	 And then it is necessary to place a plaster and some padding, unless an abscess forms; then place a plate on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	 But if the cramp is in the inner parts, you should turn the palm of your hand outward, and then make something similar to a ball of cloth, and command the patient to hold that with their cramped hand; immediately wrap it with a long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	 And place a leather plate covered in cloth beneath it, so that the plate is pressed against the palm; and hold that as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	 But if the fracture is in the outer parts, then it is necessary to place a plate on top and another plate beneath the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and immediately place the splints as the hand is wrapped with bandages between them.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	 And if there is a fracture in one of the fingers of the hand, then if it is the thumb, bandage it as needed and immediately bind it to the palm, and if you want, place a small straight plate under it so that the fracture is elevated and not displaced.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	 And consider, in your treatment, and then that, the disposition of abscesses cautiously and opposed — with your action — to what is needed when any cause occurs from those, according to how the story is retold of it.
Capitol .xiv.	 Chapter XIV
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	 On the treatment of fractures in the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	 The thigh bone, when it is observed closely, is broken and is felt according to its conversion to the front part and the uppermost part.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	 And the treatment of it is done in such a way that one bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage under the fracture, and the patient lies on their stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	 And then the minister extends all the bandage to its full length according to the quality of it when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	 But if it is near the top of the thigh, then let the bandage be close to the knee towards the end of the shinbone, so that its extension can reach up there, and another bandage under the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	 Similarly, if the break is near the knee, then let the bandage be close to the knee, and its extension should be towards the lower parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	 But if an abscess occurs in the patient, then leave it alone for some days until the abscess subsides by itself, and afterwards return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	 The stricture of the patient should be done in this way: it is necessary to wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, folding it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the leg until it reaches the ankle and the root of the hip bone.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	 And insert a long thread between the hip and the thigh near the bone at the partition below, and let the ends of the thread protrude from the higher part of the two parts, and then revolve around the thigh and hip whatever excess there is from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	 And then place on the hip in the location of that fracture thorns, and place one of those thorns over the bone of the thigh.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	 And then fill the spaces between the thigh and the hip with soft cloths, so that the stricture may be made firm.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	 And then begin with a strong bind in the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four windings, and as you move further away from the place of the fracture, let your binding be less and lighter and moister.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	 Sure, let's translate the given sentence:
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	 And then release the pressure on that part, so that no corrosion or apostema occurs in the member, nor swelling and similar things; and if any of these causes occur, then consider yourself with caution about it, and rectify what happens immediately according to what we have said many times before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	 But if the bone is affected by the ulcer that is formed, then it is necessary for you to remove that part as much as possible; and if not, make an incision on it and clean it, and treat it with what preceded the memory until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	 And sometimes this fracture of the thigh or other bones is adjusted with splints, as we have said in the case of the shoulder and the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	 But nevertheless, in the restoration of it done in such a way, no limping occurs in the patient; and if it is restored alone, or something is applied to the other leg, then it is necessary for the one on which it always stands to limp.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	 And know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a little more or less, and all this depends on the diversity of complexions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	 It seems like you provided only the chapter number "Capitol .xv." without any accompanying text. If you can provide the full content of this chapter or a specific line from it, I would be happy to help with the translation into English!
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	 It appears that there is no provided text following "De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh." If you can provide the full sentence or paragraph, I'll be glad to assist with its translation into English.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	 Here is the line-by-line translation:
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	 If the patient has a fracture, it is only a crack or break in their parts, whether with injury or without, and everything is dependent on their sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	 And the restoration of the patient is such that what is broken from their parts is enclosed with the aforementioned until it is united and joined as much as possible by equality, facility, and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	 Then place a plaster and place it on that round steel if you need it; and strengthen it with a bandage as is appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	 Then consider all the precautions that we have recommended for other fractures, such as preventing inflammation and similar issues, so that you can avoid any accident and provide what is suitable for the patient until they are healed.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter XVI
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	 On the restoration of a thigh fracture.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	 Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the femur; the other is thin and is called the tibia.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	 And whatever species of fracture occurs to either of these two bones, the restoration of them is done in the same way as for the arm, and the operation for them is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	 And if two bones are fractured simultaneously, the leg becomes disjointed in all its parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	 And if a more subtle bone is broken, the leg becomes disjointed before [or: in front of] the parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	 And if a thicker bone is broken, you find it behind [or: after], and this is one of the causes that are not familiar to you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	 Then immediately administer extension, traction, and ligament bonding according to [or: in proportion with] the same principle.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	 However, it is necessary that if the leg fracture has many fragments, the extension should be less and lighter, and you can help with your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	 And in the case of leg operations, similar to arm operations, when you align the splints and complete the entire operation, then take splints of pine wood which are placed beneath the causes [or: reasons] that are placed on the soles [or: feet], and these are made from palm branches; choose those with a small thickness, not too thin, and their length should be according to the length of the leg, and inserted from the ankle downwards.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	 Then wrap each splint in two layers of cloth according to its length, and place one on the broken part of the leg from one side and the other on the opposite side, and they should go from the ankle downwards to the lowest part of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	 And then tie the two ropes in three places on both ends and the middle, because with this structure the leg is prevented from bending to the right or left side, and it stays in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	 And then a wooden splint is administered according to the length of the leg; it should be placed on it so that it maintains its immobility.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	 And it is particularly important that you do this in cases of a fracture, and when there is severe pain.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 And then examine the leg every day and study it for any changes, and guard against abscesses or inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of these causes occurs, then stay with him using what is necessary until he is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter XVII
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	 About the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	 The ankle does not always fracture completely; rather, some of the bones in the foot may fracture at times; and the toes of the foot rarely fracture, and they are only affected by dislocation in most cases.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	 And if the bones of the foot appear to be fractured and sometimes these bones are raised above each other, then place the patient's foot on a prepared surface as they would walk.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	 Here's the line-by-line translation:
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	 And then strengthen that with the foot in a stretched-out position, since you have wrapped it with cloth and other necessary materials.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	 And after three or four days have passed, then you unbind the bandages, for you will find the bones swollen, or bruised, or dislocated, and the treatment for these is as follows:
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	 But if any are bruised, then restore them, and wrap them as I have recommended to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	 Then place on the bruised finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be slightly wider than the finger; then lay the foot on this board that I have recommended to you, and strengthen that with a proper bandage.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	 But if what is bruised of the bones are two or three or more, then place on each finger a splint of its appropriate size wrapped in linen cloth, and strengthen the board at the sole of the foot, and let it stand with one end of the board under the belly of the foot so that it holds firmly.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	 And it is important for you to remember not to overlook any of the causes that I have mentioned to you in other cases of accidents, and be prepared for every eventuality with what is necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	 **Capítulo dieciocho.**
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	 Sobre las fracturas en el hueso de la cadera y el fémur, así como en el pene y el escroto del hombre.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	 Cuando el hueso de la cadera de una mujer está fracturado, entonces colóquenla en una postura caída, y después inclínela hacia la parte inferior del torso un poco, y sosténla desde atrás.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	 Luego, la matrona debe llenar el hueso con algodón, y se debe hacer lo mismo en los otros huesos; y luego se debe sacudir a la mujer, y elevar suavemente sus piernas un poco, porque todo esto debe olvidarse hasta que el hueso esté frente a la parte del hueso como se espera y el hueso roto regrese.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	 Luego coloque vendajes sobre sus piernas, y cuando desee orinar, retire el algodón con facilidad y luego orine; luego coloque nuevamente el algodón y regrese según la misma manera en que lo hizo al principio, y luego regrese a su primer vendaje. ierno.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	 Y haga esto durante siete días o hasta que se recupere, porque el hueso está restaurado.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	 And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and place on its opening a reed cannula; insert the entire bladder into the patient's wound, and then blow through the cannula with all your strength until the bladder is inflated inside the wound, for the fracture will return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	 And it should be filled with cotton and left there for several days, as we have been advised, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	 And when the bone of a man or woman is broken, then administer for its restoration and setting that which has been advised for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	 And what is right is not hidden in these common fractures and which happen rarely, especially to those who have some learning and experience and understand my words; for that fracture shows you the major ways of the proper method in restoration and setting it, and so understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	 But when the man's penis is broken, take an eggshell, and put the penis into it; then place over it a wrapper of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and then let it lie for three days or thereabouts, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	 It seems that "Capitulo .xix." is meant to indicate "Chapter XIX". This would be a heading or title for the section of the text rather than a complete sentence with meaning to translate.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	 Here's my translation:
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	 The sentence suggests that in cases of bone fracture with injury, it is particularly important if the bone is large like the hip or thigh bone, to quickly cauterize and perform phlebotomy if the conditions for phlebotomy are suitable as mentioned before.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	 And if the wound is bleeding, then you should apply pressure to stop the bleeding, and sprinkle powdered white lead on it, unless there is another cause at hand.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	 And then begin to set the bone immediately that day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	 But if an abscess occurs, then you should leave the setting of the bone until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided. Do not approach it on the third or fourth day, for you will cause bad accidents to happen.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	 But if the broken bone is protruding over the skin, then you should proceed to reduce it and make it even with your hands, with ease and with little force.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	 But if the reduction is not possible with your hands, then you should reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, whose length is seven or eight fingers, and its width according to the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary that the doctor takes three or four of these according to what is needed for all kinds of fractures in every kind of treatment.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence into English:
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	 "And if it is an acute condition with swelling at the ends of its extremities; and if there is thickening above it, and from the middle of it to the parts that are divided.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And this is its form.
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	 "And it is named in Greek 'voluntary hernia,' and it is a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	 "Therefore, the affected acute extremity should be placed higher than the prominent bone's extremity.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	 And you push it once until the bone returns, and it is equalized with some glue.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	 And therefore, you should strive to equalize the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is thin and does not accept the instrument well, then it is necessary that you insert the end of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	 But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have mentioned, then cut it with one of the cutting instruments that we have named; or saw it with one of the saws in any manner possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	 And then scrape away what remains on the bone of roughness and small splinters.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	 And when the bone has been returned to its place, and immediately after the reduction the patient experiences very intense pain, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and then do this, so that you may provide great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	 After you have completed the bone's restoration, then immerse a cloth in black stiptic wine, especially if it is summer, and do not place any cerate or other oily substance on the wound, so that rot and corruption will not occur in it.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	 And immediately administer steel (magnesium sulfate) at the time of completion of the bone's restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can scrape it with forceps and use dressings according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	 And be very careful not to strain the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this and caused either death or severe harm to their patients, which is madness.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	 And if there is a slight swelling, make it soft, different from the swelling of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	 And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear that evil accidents which we have mentioned may happen to it, and there is pain in the place, then do not put steel (magnesium sulfate) on it, but make a dressing of hard cloths instead of steel, and bind it with them.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	 And when the wound has begun to heal, with a brace placed on it for one or two days, then you remove the cloth that was placed over it with vinegar, and proceed to administer calves' foot jelly, which by our custom is used to treat wounds, such as tetrapharmacon and similar ointments.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	 And ensure that you release the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is healed and consolidated, and it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the putrefaction flows away from it towards the lower parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	 If many days have passed and the wound is neither healed nor separated from the brace, then know that there are stones in the small intestine, for it is necessary to examine the wound with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	 And from those stones, those which are separated should be removed and extracted. Those which cannot be separated and cause the limb to swell and pain, you must try to cut them out as best as possible.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	 And if pus or ichor comes out of the wound, which indicates that it is suppurating or another type of corruption and putrefaction, then you should place on each one of them water that suits it for the cure of which the previous narrative has already been made in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	 Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Capitol .xx.	 It seems like you have provided the chapter or section number "Capitol .xx." without any text following it. To provide a line-by-line translation into English, I would need the actual content of that chapter or section in the language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Please provide the specific text you'd like me to translate.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	 Let's break down the sentence into its components and then translate it line by line:
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	 The provided medieval medical text appears to be instructing on the treatment of swelling or inflammation. Here is a line-by-line translation:
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	 And leave the bandage on without removing it for a few days; then remove it and replace it with another until the swelling is reduced; or strengthen that lead plate, because lead has the property of reducing all inflammation in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 But if the swelling has already turned to stone and is tight, and it's necessary to remove it immediately, then cut through it at its highest part, and cut away the excess and protruding parts, or shave it with a razor until it is reduced; and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter XXI
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	 Chapter XXI: On the restoration of a fracture when it has been restored, and then keep the limb gentle and immobile according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	 When a bone fracture has been restored, and then the limb is kept gentle and immobile, this occurs only for several reasons: one of which is too much loosening or tightening of the bandages, preventing the nutrients from reaching the limb; or excessive wrapping; or excessive movement at the wrong time; or insufficient blood in the patient's body and their weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	 And the treatment for this is to give the patient food to eat and make his heart tender until his blood increases in him; and administer a bath; and bring joy and happiness to him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	 And then place the plaster on the member, so that the plaster attracts the corrupting substance, or continue to keep it moist with tepid water, until the substance runs and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	 About the treatment of broken bones, when they are crookedly restored and the operation is forbidden for this reason:
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	 When the restored member approaches healing from crookedness and protrusion of the broken bone and knot, and this is due to the form of the member, nevertheless, the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, it does not matter if you receive the word of someone who thinks that member was recently broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	 However, there have been foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is very blameworthy, leading to great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	 But if the limping and knotting are recent, then they should be soaked in tepid water in which softening herbs have been cooked, such as leaves of plantain and root of comfrey, melilot, and similar; and let there be made for him a plaster with a mollifying plaster such as diachylon well made; or let it be taken mucilage of root of comfrey and ground with egg white or with oil of almonds, and let it be plastered with that; or let fat figs be taken and crushed with chicken feces, and similar to those of the medicines which are named amermans consolidacio.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	 And sometimes it is resolved with persistent gentle rubbing using the moistest hands, and the limb should be moved in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	 But if the tortuosity has already advanced and is strong and turned into stone, and surgical intervention is required, then it is necessary for the pus to be brought out from above and the continuity of the bone to be dissolved. The excess material should be removed with a sharp instrument, and ease should be given to that part by applying diligent effort and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter XXIII
De sermo en dislocacio.	 On speech and dislocation
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	 Dislocation is the dislocation of some of the joints from their proper place, preventing movement, distorting the shape of the limb, and causing the patient great pain and harm.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	 Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to immediately try to reduce it, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the joint will become swollen and hard with water, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	 And for this reason, it is not necessary to massage or stretch during the swelling phase, because excessive movement causes spasms and intense pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	 Certainly! Let's break down and translate the sentence line by line:
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	 And every member should be treated with the remedy that is associated with it in its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	 And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation as preceded in fracture, from the highest part of the body to the lowest.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	 Of the treatment for the dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	 When both jaws are dislocated, and if not delayed; the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are moved from their places by a slight movement and softened somewhat; or they are completely dislocated, so that they are softened at the joint to the point where saliva runs from the patient's mouth and he cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in its skin.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	 However, when the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its place with little intervention.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	 However, if the dislocation is complete and severe, it is necessary to administer a slight reduction promptly, without delaying at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 And the attendant should hold the patient's head, while the physician introduces his two thumbs of one hand into the patient's mouth and presses against the dislocated jaw, if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides. The other fingers should be outside, gripping the patient's hands. And he should tell the patient to stop moving his jaws and let them go wherever they want. And the physician should guide the jaw back into place until it returns to its proper position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	 And if the reduction of the patient is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer steam with hot water and oil until both are slightly reduced, without delaying the complete reduction as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	 And when they return and are swallowed, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then place those powdered cloths with wax over it, made of wax and olive oil; and then bind it gently with soft bands.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	 And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be supported between two pillows, so that it does not tilt to the right or left; and do not force them to chew anything; when they are able, let their food be softened until the pains subside and the jaws are healed, then let them eat whatever they want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	 And this should be administered gently, and do not work on opening the mouth for eating, drinking, or speaking until the jaw is healed and cured.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	 And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some point and have not returned to their places, then apply cold compresses and give frequent drinks of cold water, and cause the patient's stomach to be emptied quickly, and cause them to vomit pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	 And when you see this, know that it is a loss; and many times the one on whom this happens dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter 25
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	 On reducing the dislocation of the collarbone and the end of the shoulder bone.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	 The collarbone is not dislocated from within the chest because of its connection with the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated on the outside part, and this is clear from touch.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	 And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	 Then press the area with your palm strongly, because it will return (to its proper place).
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	 Then place a poultice and powder on that spot and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	 However, the end of that which is the elbow and is connected with it (the collarbone) is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and bandaged according to what we have said and according to what you find appropriate.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	 Then place a poultice, and powder, and compress, and instruct the patient to rest and take repose until healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	 And with this same treatment, the end of the shoulder bone is reduced when it is separated from its place. >/i>
Capitol .xxvi.	 **Capítulo 26.**
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	 Sobre la reducción de la dislocación del músculo.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	 Sabes que el músculo no se disloca sino en tres maneras. La primera manera es cuando está dislocado desde la cabeza del hueso hasta la parte de los dedos.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	 La segunda manera es cuando está dislocado en la parte superior del músculo, lo cual es raro; y no se disloca hacia atrás por el hombro; ni tampoco hacia adelante por los nervios.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	 Y generalmente se disloca y sale por la parte de los dedos hacia la cabeza del hueso, lo cual ocurre principalmente en aquellos individuos con poca carne; en tales casos, es fácil de dislocar. Pero en aquellos con mucha carne, es difícil de sacar. IENTENDIDO
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	 Y a veces sucede en algunos hombres por golpes o caídas, y el músculo del paciente se llena de pus, y se cree que ya está dislocado debido a eso.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	 Por lo tanto, debes probarlo mientras aún estás junto al paciente, y luego procede con su curación.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	 Here's the translation of your source sentence:
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	 If it is dislocated in the feet or ankles, and you then find clear swelling that is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	 And of this dislocation, a slight reduction can be made when it is recent and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	 And the reduction of it is that the attendant raises the patient's hand to the affected area; and then places his fingers underneath the toe, and lifts the joint with force back into its place, and the attendant raises the patient's hand, and extends it upward; and then places it downward because it returns slightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	 But if by that which we have said it does not return, and from the beginning when the dislocation occurred several days have passed, then it is necessary for the patient to be bathed in warm water and administered a poultice that softens and relaxes, such as cucumber juice, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	 And then the patient should be placed on their back and a wool pad of moderate thickness should be placed under their toe. The physician should place his heel on the pad and lift the top of the toe with all his strength, and pull the patient's hand so that it is not moved away from underneath. Another attendant should hold the patient's head so that it is not moved away from underneath, because this will soon return to its proper place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	 And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and that is for you to have present a man who is taller than the patient, and he should stand on the side of that limb, and insert his muscle beneath the armpit of the patient and raise the armpit upwards until the patient is suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient's hand away from their abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	 If the patient is light, then it is necessary that another cause be suspended with him, so that he becomes heavier, because the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 And he is reduced in another way: that is, a long pole is placed on the ground with a rounded head, similar to a pestle, not too thick or thin, and then the patient is placed below it; after which sheets are placed over the head of the pole, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and then his hand is extended on one side of the other part; and his body is stretched on the other side with strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	 And if it is difficult to reduce him for all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this treatment: that you take a pole whose length is two spans and its width four fingers, and its thickness decreases towards the top like this:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	 And then place round sheets over the head of the pole so that the pole does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	 Then place the patient under the tilt of the pole, and extend their hand or arm over the pole within the middle section, and bind the pole over the shoulders, arms, and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	 The text appears to be discussing the treatment of joint pain, specifically when it affects the feet. Let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	 And it is necessary that the patient's food be minimal until the limb is soothed, because this facilitates his healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	 And the food should be given in larger quantities around seven or five times, and exercise should be performed; and if it is not stopped and softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	 But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that affects it or for another reason, then it is necessary that a cautery with three holes be administered in that area, as was previously mentioned in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	 And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not fixed, and the plaster and stricture are reduced onto it several times, and it is not fixed and caught, and he cannot lift that arm to its original position, then know that his nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be put back in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	 For the dislocation that occurs in the feet and ankles or in the back of the legs, the reduction is done with traction and extension by hand, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And let the other constriction be administered there, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	 And if there is an accidental healing delay in the limb and tardiness in its movement, then the patient should use warm baths until that heaviness is relieved and the limb returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	 On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	 Know that the shoulder joint is difficult to dislocate and likewise returns with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most commonly forward or backward. The dislocation of the shoulder is not hidden from you because it causes a visible deformity or changes the feeling of the area according to how it was dislocated. And when you adjust the dislocated shoulder with the socket, this becomes clearly apparent, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor can the muscle reach it.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	 It is fitting to cut [the skin], and to reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before the swelling comes, for if it comes with the swelling, its reduction becomes difficult, and it is hardly healed completely; especially when it is in the backward direction, because this is the worst of all species of dislocations, and the most painful, and many people have died from it.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	 Certainly! Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	 But if the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then return it so that you bend the hand with its own hand, until you feel the elbow with the palm of your hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	 And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and great force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	 And it is that two assistants should extend the arm, and hold it in this way with both hands so that it does not rise up against the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	 And then the arm should be turned in all directions, because it is wrapped with a long-folded cloth over the hand of the patient, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	 And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this helps to facilitate the lubrication of the joint; and then press the joint strongly until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	 And then the reduction of it requires that it be placed on a poultice in which there is astringency and dryness with egg white, and it should be bound tightly, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	 And then it should be unbound; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you should remove the bandage from him and leave it thus.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	 And if you see that the joint is not strengthened, then you should renew the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for some days until it becomes stronger; and after that, remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	 But if a gravity (heaviness) occurs around the reduction of the joint, and the patient's condition is in motion, then administer a bath and subtle friction, along with compression, until it is relieved; or place on the joint something weighty, like a heavy cushion; and then bind it, leaving it on the bones day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	 And then remove that (weight), and put him in a bath; and when he comes out, then rub the joint with warm friction, and then place on it again something weighty, like a round stone, once, and the second time, and the third time
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	 within a bath, until it is healed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	 And if you wish, place on it a piece of cow skin that has been moistened and scraped with a knife, and bind it tightly around that; and do this several times, because that (the joint) is moistened and returns to its condition.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	 "About the treatment of joint dislocation in a patient, it concerns the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	 "Sometimes the hand of a patient is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy, unlike other joints. However, it is important that the reduction be done quickly in the hour when the dislocation occurs, before the site becomes swollen or an abscess forms.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 "The reduction of the dislocation is done by placing the patient's hand joint on a table and having an assistant extend the patient's hand, while the doctor places their hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and pushes it until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	 "However, it is important to consider whether the palm is already turned towards the back of the hand. If this is the case, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; if the dislocation is preceding towards the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls over that prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	 "And therefore if it returns quickly, that's good; but if not, strengthen it with a compress to reduce the swelling and leave it; do not attempt this again, for otherwise, neither the patient nor you can bear the reduction of the pus after the first day has passed.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	 Here's my best guess at translating the given text into English:
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	 Certainly! Let's translate the sentence into English line by line:
Capitol .xxix.	 Capitulo XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	 Of the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	 Sometimes the fingers are dislocated completely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	 And when one of those fingers is dislocated at the back of the palm or at its base, then straighten the finger and press the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns to its place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	 Then support the tip of the finger and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and let it hang for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	 Then suspend it and stretch it until it is straightened in its own day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	 And when it is night, bind it according to that description, and do not stop unbinding it during the day and exercising with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	 And do the same if it is dislocated at the base of the hand, and bind it to that place and do with it the first operation until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	 Do the same in other places where it is dislocated.
Capitol .xxx.	 Chapter XXX
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	 Of the treatment of dislocation of the spine of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	 When there is complete dislocation of one of the vertebrae in the back or neck, and many vertebrae are displaced from their places, then in that case there is no cure, because death comes to the patient. ️
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	 And the sign of this is that the patient's discharge occurs involuntarily and cannot be controlled; and often some members of him are weakened, or both legs, or both arms, or one of these; or a vertebra has been displaced from its place, because often it happens that one is displaced and sometimes the removal of those to four divisions is done.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	 Therefore, when it is lifted towards the posterior parts and is called jaundice.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	 But the cure for it is to consider if jaundice occurs in childhood, because then there is no cure and no complete healing from it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	 But the ancients have spoken about the causes and treatments of jaundice occurring in adulthood or from similar conditions with many words, from which the greatest benefit is derived; but I have abbreviated it so that only the essentials are retained, due to my own closeness to the subject matter. With this, I have presented and formulated it using various instruments, through which I will demonstrate and explain it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	 And I say that jaundice occurring in the anterior part of the feet is neither caused nor healed by it; similarly, when it occurs on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	 And of these, only that which occurs in the back is cured with what I will relate.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	 And it is that the patient should be placed on his back with a pillow under his head near the wall, and that a moist instrument should be placed underneath him to prevent his feet from being lifted.  \\ (Note: "esturment" can also mean "tool" or "instrument", but in this context, it likely refers to something like a cushion or blanket.)
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	 It seems like the text is describing a medical procedure involving the use of poles or rods to immobilize or support a patient. Let's break it down:
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	 Sure, I'd be happy to help with that translation! Here it goes line by line:
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 Certainly! Let's break down the text line by line:
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	 And then each assistant should extend the bandage to the base of the thigh, and ensure that the two thighs and their corresponding bandages are not moved from their places in which they are fixed. However, they should not be secured too tightly as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	 And the doctor places his palms firmly on the spine until it returns, or he can place them on a table, and then he should position his feet on the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	 But if it does not return with this method, then take a table whose length or width is approximately three arms' lengths, and make an opening in the wall where we said the patient is close to, so that the end of the table can fit through it.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	 And then place half of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end of the table, and presses firmly until the spine is shortened and returns to its proper place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	 And if you wish, open the turn that is wrapped around the hand; and it is that you place under the patient's head two stakes at the end of the fist, each of which should be one arm in length, and place the patient's head at the end of two stakes likewise; and let there be a palm's width between each stake. And already in each stake make an opening through which the turn can pass, and let each be firmly fixed to the ground so that it is not moved.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	 And place a round stick in which is the tourniquet, and let it be turned in the two holes of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	 And at the end of it is a hole in which the stick is made, and its length is one hand's breadth with what is wrapped around; and in the two other sticks there is something similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 And then tighten the bands that you have tied around the feet of the patient in the hole that is nearest to their head, and the bands that you have tied around their thighs in the tourniquet that is nearest to their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	 And then there should be a servant at each tourniquet to twist it with their hand, and the doctor should remove the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	 And this is how the tourniquet is made:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	 And after the spine has been removed and the place cleaned, then you should put a dry plaster with egg white, and then cotton; and then place on the plaster a piece of wood, whose width is three fingers or around that, and whose length is such that it covers the place of the ulcer, and over the part where the spine was.  (Note: The word "gelbositat" seems to be related to "gibbus," which means a hump or swelling on the back.)
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	 And then bind the patient with the bandages we mentioned earlier, and feed them with fine food until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	 And if there remains any trace in the area after healing, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and cleanse with the use of a poultice for an extended period, which we have recommended; and already a lead plate has been applied to that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	 Sometimes it happens that there is an issue at the end of the spine of the back, and it is believed to be caused by that dislocation; and that bone is very delicate, so one should not attempt to move it with this medicine, because it could cause death.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter 31
De curacio de anca dislocada.	 On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	 Know that the hip joint and the muscle joint should only be treated for dislocation, and not as with other joints, which can be treated with minor displacement or concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	 The hip joint can be dislocated in four ways: either it is displaced internally, or externally, or anteriorly, or posteriorly.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	 It is most commonly dislocated internally, and less commonly anteriorly or posteriorly.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	 And the sign of the dislocation in the patient's teeth is that, when you align the patient's healthy leg with the patient, it is longer and more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot backwards, which is where the pus has collected from the pus-filled abscess, because the head of the bone has already arrived here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	 The sign of that in which a dislocation occurs is outside the joints, because its occurrences are opposite to this occurrence.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	 And the sign of that in which a dislocation occurs in the front joints is that it extends its leg according to its custom, but nevertheless it cannot bend it without pain, and if it insists on going it cannot proceed forward; and the patient's urine is retained and their groin is swollen, and they walk on the heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	 And the sign of that in which a dislocation occurs in the back joints is that it cannot extend the foot or bend it forward as it usually does, and its leg is shorter than the other, and the groin is swollen, and the head of the bone is at that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	 Here's my best attempt at translating the given sentence:
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	 In that case where the dislocation is recent and is one of the four types of dislocations, you should turn the joint so that it extends inward towards the partitions and outward towards the partitions, and move it to the right and left, because it returns easily and does not require another treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	 This text seems to describe a medical procedure for dealing with a hernia or intestinal issue. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	 This line appears to be describing an extension or stretching of the patient's body or a particular part of it. Let's break it down:
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	 And let the extension of all these be in one moment, until the patient is raised with their body off the ground and remains suspended.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	 And this type of extension applies to all four (limbs).
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	 And so if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then every type of treatment that I will say about the proper cure is necessary.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	 In the reduction of the dislocation, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is inward, it is necessary that the patient be placed supine on their left side; and then place the liament (bandages) over the back of the thigh in that location which is between the head of the thigh and the place below the groin; and then extend the liament above the groin to the highest part of the fork (pubic bone).
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	 And then another strong assistant should take the arms of the patient and press firmly on the thick part of the dislocated thigh and extend it outward with great force, because that returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	 And this type is of easier treatment for reducing this member than other types.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	 But if it is resistant and does not obey the treatment with this type of cure completely, then it is necessary that both feet of the patient be tied together tightly, lightly, over both heels and both ankles.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	 And let the length of each be by the quantity of four times, and let the afflicted leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two times.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	 And let the patient be suspended over the top of the post, with their head higher; and let the length of them from the ground be the quantity of two arms' lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 And then command a strong young man to push the head of the cushion, and let another young man be suspended with the patient, and the other young man pushes the cushion strongly with vigor, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	 But in the proper reduction, when it is a dislocation that has come out, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back as we have described when they have been gelbozated; and let the bandage be strengthened specifically on the afflicted leg and on their feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	 And then two posts should be placed, one under their feet and the other under their head; and then adjusted posts should be placed in the middle of the bed, on which wet cloths should be wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed because the post is between their thighs, because you want the extension to the parts below to not be pulled.  />
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	 And immediately each assistant extends to their designated area, while the physician with his hand guides the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	 Therefore, if it complies with the reversal, it will be very good; and if not, place [the hernia] on that [area] carefully, as we said earlier for that same guidance.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	 But ensure that the patient lies on their side quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	 And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary for the thigh to be slightly extended, and it should be according to this same account on the heel; and the physician places the palm of his right hand on the patient's ankle, and then presses that with the other hand, and with that pressure extends [the leg] back to the lower part behind the shin.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	 And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended backward, but rather raised off the ground; it is also necessary for him to be placed on a hard surface, as we mentioned earlier if his ankle is dislocated outward, according to what we said about placing him on two ankles; and let his face be down and the bandages extended, as we have said.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	 And it is necessary to apply pressure with a board over the area where the joint is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	 Therefore, once the reduction is completed as necessary — and you see the sign of reduction in the patient, which should not be hidden from you, and that is when you extend the patient's legs and see those swellings and the patient extends their leg and expands it without hesitation, then know that the limb has been returned to its proper position — at this point, place two cushions and apply a poultice, and wrap with a bandage so that the width is not excessive in any part; and let the patient rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	 Then remove the bandage and the poultice, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	 Then, if you see those swellings disappear, know that the dislocation has been set, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	 And if you see any sign of inflammation, then return and apply a poultice to it, and extend that according to your first method, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	 Then remove the poultice, and make the patient walk on both legs for some days, until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	 **Capítulo 32.**
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	 **Sobre el tratamiento de la luxación de la articulación del hombro.**
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	 El hombro puede luxarse de tres maneras: hacia afuera, hacia adentro, más hacia abajo que hacia atrás; pero no puede luxarse hacia delante.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	 El signo de la luxación es que, cuando ordenes al paciente que aplique su pierna contra el costado, sabrás que el hombro está luxado.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	 La restauración de todas estas formas es que hagas que el paciente se siente derecho, extendiendo su pierna si puede; adhieres tus dedos a la cara del paciente y pones su pie entre tus pies; luego haces que tu hombro se adhiera al de él con tus palmas, y mantén esas entre tus manos sobre el hombro del paciente con fuerza, mientras otro ayudante extiende su pie hasta que el hombro vuelva a su lugar.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	 El signo de que ha sido reducida es que su pierna se adhiera al costado con ligereza y sin esfuerzo.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 Luego vendaja eso y haz que la pierna se adhiera al costado, y luego lía ambos juntos con un vendaje durante tres o cuatro días, y luego retira el vendaje.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	 And do not let the patient walk for some days until he is healed and strengthened.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	 But if the reduction of him to you is necessary, then administer strong extension with bandages such as those described in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter XXXIII
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	 On the Treatment of Talus Dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	 The talus may sometimes be displaced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the direction, and its dislocation occurs either inward or outward.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	 And the sign of its dislocation is that you will see the swelling of the talus proceeding in the direction to which it has been dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	 But the treatment of its reduction is easy, and it should be extended gently with the hands and bandaged until it returns to its place.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	 However, in the treatment of it when it is dislocated according to its course, you should make the patient lie on his back, and let him have a strong and vigorous attendant behind his back in the middle part of him.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	 And then you take with your right hand the foot from the superior part, and with your left hand below the foot in the place of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	 And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then two times with the left, and then extend with the left; and push the sole of the foot with your right hand behind the thigh without effort.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	 And do this twice as we have agreed.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	 And then push the sole of the foot to the thigh for the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	 Therefore, if it returns in one time or two according to this manner, and you see the foot swollen, it is good; but if not, then repeat the operation on him, because that will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	 But if it is forbidden for you to reduce him in this way that we have described, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and tie a sturdy rope around a wooden post that is firmly planted in the ground, and place it between his thighs, and you have already wrapped the cloth around him so that he does not slip.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	 And then the servant holding his thighs should stretch the foot with their hands or with a bandage that lies over the instep of the foot; and then each servant stretches against the extension of their counterpart, and the rope should be stretched between the patient's thighs holding it, so that his body is not pulled towards the sides beyond its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	 And then the physician reduces the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant holds the healthy part at the ends, because the dislocation returns more easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	 And therefore, once the dislocation has returned and it is clear to you that the reduction was successful, then place a poultice on it and bandage it tightly, and bind the foot with a bandage to the thigh.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	 And be careful or avoid damaging the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over it is not too tight and does not press on them strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	 And then let it be for two days or three; and if the bandage has softened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	 And then unbind it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	 But if it is necessary for the patient to move before that time, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not dissolve and become corrupt again, and thus it will not receive healing.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	 And if an abscess forms, then you should administer to the patient that which was previously mentioned in our narrative, in another place for treatment and application, until it has been removed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	 Chapter 34
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	 Of the treatment for dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	 It is advisable that the dislocated person be stretched with little effort without difficulty, which is quite easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	 However, if the dislocation is in some toes of the foot, then you should have the patient sit on a hard surface like the ground or a table, and be positioned as if they were standing.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	 Then you should stand on the foot of the patient, placing your own foot over what is protruding from the joints, and then step firmly with your foot until it returns to its original position, and you see that it has been straightened without any bulge appearing.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	 Then place a board under the sole of his foot that supports the entire foot, which has two handles, and then strengthen it with a decent and firm bandage for three days; then remove it and have him rest from walking for many days until he is strengthened and recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter 35
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	 Of the kinds of dislocation that are caused with a blow, or a fracture, or both at the same time.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	 When any of these causes occur and you try to treat it and restore the patient, many times death occurs.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	 And it is not necessary that the one who assumes the care of him be presumptuous, but rather he should be wise in the art, experienced over a long period, merciful and compassionate, patient, not reckless or presumptuous; and he should use at the beginning of the treatment only those medicines that cautiously draw out pustules, leaving the patient to divine judgment, except for him whom you hope will be saved from perdition, with relief from illness, in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	 And then you should immediately work to achieve his reduction at the beginning of the cause, before a cautious pustule forms.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	 And then if the member returns as we wish, administer a regime that cautiously draws out pustules and treats the wound with appropriate drying ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	 And if there is dislocation with fracture and the stagia bones are separated, then you should bore through their substance, and do as we have said in the case of simple illnesses that were mentioned earlier, regarding those places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	 And beware and avoid according to your ability that which is harmful in the paths of fear, as I have previously warned you; for this is better for you and more lasting for your glory, and healthier for your true body in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	 Amen. Thus ends the words of Avicenna, may God bless him.
Amen.	 Amen.
