Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	 Here begins the words of Al-Bukhari.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	 Oh, children, since I have completed this book to you, which is the last of medical science, its completion will be fulfilled in it, and through its expositions, and its declarations, it is clear to me that I should complete it to you with this treatise, which is a part of the operation by hand, known as surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	 For the operation by hand is fallen into disuse in our region and in our time, to the point where its science has greatly diminished, and its traces have vanished; nothing remains of it except some small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which they altered most of it and deviated into error and falsity, until its meanings are closed off and its strength and art is weakened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	 And it seems to me that I should revive it with the organization of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it may come with the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work as they are by addition of the declaration, and for preparation of it, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	 "And for this, Ipocrates says that with a name it is nothing, but in action it is something small, and mostly in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	 "But we have already spoken of that at the beginning of this book; for those who are not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy will fall into error, which will cause the death of men, as I have seen happen too often, because some are trained in this science and yet they ignore it without knowledge or experimentation.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	 "For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor cut an scrofulous abscess on the neck of a woman, and in doing so he also cut some arteries in her neck, causing a great deal of blood to flow until the woman died in his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	 "And I saw another doctor who tried to remove a stone from a man who had been suffering for some time, and the stone was large. When he attempted to remove it, he also took out a piece of the bladder with it, which caused the man to die on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	 "And I was immediately called to remove it, and upon seeing the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	 And then you unbind him according to his desires, and then you rebind him, and then you leave him dry for several days and order that we unbind the bandage; and this is how it goes until the space and the foot are suppurated, and it leads to destruction.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	 And I was called to him, and I prepared to unbind the bandage, and thus he found tranquility and so alleviated his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	 But still, the corruption was confirmed in the limb, so it could not be restrained, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient was in danger.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	 And I saw another physician who lanced an infected abscess, and it became ulcerated after a few days, until the malignancy of it was magnified with the lord of him.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	 The cause of which is that the cancerous growth is full of black bile, so it is not beneficial for it to be removed completely with iron, but rather it should be treated locally on the affected limb.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	 And for this reason, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two paths: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is a work with which there is danger in the greatest dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	 And therefore, take up your weapons with diligence and under God's protection, and may your patients have success and steadfastness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	 And use the best way by the grace of God to attain salvation and praiseworthy success, and leave behind terrible diseases that are difficult to cure. Remove your weapons from whatever causes you fear, so that trust in your faith and in your name does not elude you; for it is more befitting your glory, and both now and hereafter, it will be attributed to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	 France has already discussed with some of its physicians:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	 "Do not practice harmful medicine, lest you be called bad doctors.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	 And I have already dedicated this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	 Here begins the division of the book, and first is the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	 The first chapter deals with the head, particularly the shapes of instruments and the iron used in cauteries, as well as what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	 The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The second chapter concerns incisions and perforations, as well as cupping glasses, bloodletting, the extraction of arrows or similar objects, all arranged and ordered according to the shapes of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	 Division of the third section.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The third chapter, on reduction and dislocation, and the treatment of sprains and similar conditions; an ordered chapter about the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	 On cautery with fire or sharp medicine and reminders about the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	 With this begins the treatise of the entire book. ›
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	 I must tell you about the qualities of the tools for that cautery and their defects, and in which situation it is forbidden to perform cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	 Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery tool and its defects is a long and elaborate discourse, subtle in knowledge, and secretly hidden; and many wise men have already spoken about it, and they have disagreed among themselves, and to me only a little of their speeches is sufficient, fearing prolixity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	 And so I say that you may perform cautery in every situation universally, whether it involves material or not, except for two situations, which are situations involving cold without material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	 In the cold and dry situation with material I will disagree; for some say that cautery is beneficial in that case, and others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for a disease caused by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is appropriate that a cold and dry disease with water, which is hot and wet, be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	 And say that the opposite of what was said before is true, because the cautery is used to help in all dry and cold diseases that appear in men's bodies, for when you compare the body of a man and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	 And I say by the words of that one, that I have experienced this many times myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	 However, it is not necessary for someone who has already been trained and practiced in the chapter of cautery by recent practice, and who knows the diversity of human nature and the dispositions of diseases within them, as well as their causes, accidents, and duration.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	 But in other conditions, there is no need to fear, especially in cold and moist diseases, for all doctors have agreed on these matters, and they are not disagreeing about the help of cautery in those cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	 And know, my sons, that concerning the secret of healing with cautery using fire and its effectiveness, it has been said about cautery with medicine that it is better, because fire is simple and its action only affects the member on which it is used, not harming the neighboring member except for a slight injury.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	 Based on the provided example, I'll attempt to translate this sentence into English:
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	 Sure, I'd be happy to help translate this medieval medical text into English. Here it is line by line:
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	 And know, sons, that they disagree about the time when it is appropriate to make cautery and consider the best time to be in spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	 And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times because the harm caused by accidental circumstances is diminished by the benefit obtained from cautery, and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or serious and persistent diseases which do not tolerate delay due to fear of worse outcomes, which is greater than a slight harm caused by the timing.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	 And do not let this concern you, my sons, for only the common people and foolish doctors think this way, as it is understood that the ailment which is healed by cautery does not recur at all times, and they consider this consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	 And the reason is not as they think, because cautery is used only in cases where medicine fails to change the complexion and dry out the humors that cause pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	 However, cautery exceeds medicine in its quickness of action and the power of its operation, as well as the skill of its practitioner.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	 And it is possible that the patient's illness may return at some point in time, depending on the patient's complexion and the location of their illness, as well as their strength, and what has been prepared in their body from an excess of fluids and what they have acquired in their diet and similar causes. However, if the illness for which cautery is administered is a subtle illness with few superfluities and humors, such as cautery for tooth pain and similar cases, it is possible that the pain will not return to them. But this is usually only done for minor ailments.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	 Here's the translation for your sentence:
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	 Based on the given text, here's my attempt at translating and interpreting the new sentence:
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	 And now from here, I understand that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to my own understanding, but according to the common belief and foolish practices of many doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	 And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this only because of the properties and high quality of gold's substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	 And they said that the place of cautery does not become stiff, which is not entirely true, because I have proven and found that this happens in some bodies but not others. Cauterizing with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said; however, when you perform cautery with fire and gold, it is not clearly stated to you, because it depends on the amount of gold you want according to the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive heat. And if you place a fire over it, the gold melts from the heat, and some sheets fall into the fire for the craftsman to catch due to his occupation with it.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	 And because of this, when performing cautery with iron, you should do so more lightly and precisely to ensure proper execution.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	 And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery in several chapters and ordered those from the head to the feet, so that the seeker may find what they want from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	 "About cauterizing head pain due to cold and dampness.
Le capitol primier.	 "The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	 "This cauterization treats the cold and dampness which are the two causes of these accidents, being a cause of sores and many flows, called rheum, from the head to the parts of the ears and the cheeks, and much sleepiness, and toothache and throat pain, and generally all illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, sores, apoplexy, and similar in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	 "The way to perform this cauterization is as follows: first, instruct the patient to take a purgative medicine that cleanses the head, for three or four nights, depending on the strength of the patient, their age, and their usual habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	 "And then instruct them to shave their head with a razor, and then have that person sit between your hands on a low bench and place their feet on the ground.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	 "And then place the tip of your palm near the bridge of the nose, between their eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "However, once your finger has reached the midpoint, mark that spot with an inkwell, and then ignite the cautery olive, which is of this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	 And then place that over the indicated area with a sheet in such a way that it descends, and with which the left hand is tightly squeezed little by little, and you turn that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	 And then lightly lift your hand and look at the place, and if you see some part of the bone exposed, as much as a grain of barley, then raise your hand. If not, return your hand with that iron, or another similar one, until what I have told you is seen from the bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	 And then take a little salt and dissolve it in that place and let it sit for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	 And then place on the wound a cloth soaked in water and leave it there until the crust of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat the area with tetrapharmacon ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	 And they say that the longer the wound remains open, the better the arm heals, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	 And some of them say that the tendon should be cauterized to the bone, and the cautery should be held until a piece of the shape of the bone is charred.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	 "And then it should be scraped off whatever is adjacent to the bone, and then it should be cauterized.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	 "And others say that with the cautery one should reach the bone's interior, pressing hard until it pierces the bone, and this is the method of small incision.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	 "And it is believed that from that place, the vapors of the head are expelled.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	 "And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is healed.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	 "But I have not seen these two types of cautery used on everyone, only on some people out of fear; and if you ask me, it is better to be alive with health than not, because the head is opened due to the discontinuity of it, just as we have shown in other members, especially when the patient's head is of a weak nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	 "And the first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; and from it one exits healthy and with this work done.
Capitol segon.	 Chapter two.
Del cauteri del cap.	 On cauterizing the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	 When there is chronic and prolonged pain throughout the head of the patient, and they have used cupping glasses, leeches, capillary purges, plasters, baths, cataplasms, poultices, and similar treatments, especially if they have already been cauterized with a cautery that does not benefit them at all from any of those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not weak and finds great cold, then that one should be cauterized again with another cautery below that one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	 And then burn that part on the horn of his head with a pointed cautery until the skin breaks.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	 Incise the skin and expose the bone to the extent we have calculated, and cauterize that area with a pointed cautery at the back of the head in the place called 'vas', which is where bloodletting cups are placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	 And be careful with this, and do not expose the bone, because the patient experiences great pain from this that is different from the pain of all other cauteries on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	 And I say that this cautery should be done in its place, because the cautery used for burning the horns of the head and the occiput should be finer than the one used for burning the middle of the head; and this is how it should be done.
Capitol ters.	 Chapter three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	 On the cautery for newly onset migraine.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	 When there is sudden pain in the head or when the pain spreads to the eye, it should be treated with purifying medications and the other treatments that I have mentioned for diseases; if this does not help, then cautery on the head can be done in two ways: either by burning with a sharp instrument or with a heated iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	 "However, cauterization with medicine is such that you should take a piece of wool and clean it thoroughly, then bind the ends of it on both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	 "Then cut the painful area in the temple with a sharp lance until it reaches the bone, ensuring it is well concealed.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	 "Then strengthen it with a bandage to reduce the swelling, and leave it for three hours; then remove the bandage and apply wool, and let the wound be for two or three days, then place on it a cloth soaked in warm water until the area is soft.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 "Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	 "And if you wish, do this with some of the medicines that I have written about in the twelve treatises on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "But cauterization with iron should be done in this manner: heat the iron for cautery, and this is its form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	 "and it is called a 'nail head,' because its tip is shaped like a nail, with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small protrusion.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	 "Then place it on the painful area, and hold your hand — so that the archer's arm is not burnt — and rotate the iron slowly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	 And if the amount of him that is tied by the end of the rope equals half of him, raise your hand to prevent the artery from being tied, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And then immediately drench a cloth in salt water and place it on the wound, leaving it for three days; and then place a clean cloth with a border, and then treat with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	 And if you see, cauterize with the tip of the scalpel as a cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery in this eminence, which is quite old.
Capitol quart.	 Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	 On Cauterization of Old Eminences
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	 When you treat eminences with the water cure we have mentioned in the previous treatment, and according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment is not effective, sometimes due to the disease that is not enough for him with what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or cautery with fire, then you should heat up the scalpel until it becomes white hot. This indicates the location of the pain with a line the length of which is half the width of the finger; whether that or not. Place your hand on it once and press firmly until you incise the artery and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	 Sure, here is the line-by-line translation of the provided text:
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	 And if it concerns the care and caution regarding blood flow from an artery that is about to burst, because in its bursting there is danger, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not skilled or experienced; leave the operation to someone more knowledgeable at first.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	 And I will recall the treatment of accidental blood flow from an artery according to its method, in its section of this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 And if the remedy of this disease is not sufficient with this cautery and the patient's body is tolerant, then cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have described, and care for the wound until it heals.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	 And if you want, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on constriction of an artery with two needles, and this is a better and more effective cauterization.
Capitol .v.	 Chapter 5
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	 On the Cauterization of Earaches
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When an earache occurs due to cold and is not cured by laxative treatments or other remedies mentioned in the division, then apply the cautery, specifically one called "puncture." Its form is as follows:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	 And then pierce near the inflamed area, and lead around all of the auricle like a wheel turning, or around each specific point if the pain is in that particular area.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	 And then approach with the cautery along the ridge of the auricle, little by little more until you have found the spot with your finger.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	 And if the cautery of these points is done all over the auricle, and if it is like that, then cure the areas until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	 Chapter VI
De cauterizacio de turtura.	 On the Cauterization of Turtle Dove
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	 The turtledove that is cured by cauterization is only from the species that come through phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	 Avoid cauterization for the species that comes from dryness or from a spasm of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	 When you cure this species of turtle dove with herbs, purgatives and gargles, and your cure does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one on the ridge of the auricle, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips. 
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	 And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected area, for softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	 And the method of cauterization is such that you should cauterize with the cautery on the right side of the upper edge of the earlobe, placing it slightly above the tip of the ear, and in the temple place another one, the length of which should be according to the length of the thumb, and then hold your hand with the cautery until the majority of the size of a hazelnut is burnt.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	 And this is the shape of the cautery, and it is similar to that of the knife, whose form is presented here.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	 However, it must be more delicate than the knife, as shown here; and it is necessary that the blade of the cautery have a little less superfluous thickness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for the place with water that was previously processed until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	 Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	 On the cauterization of old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	 When apoplexy is old and you treat it with the water we mentioned and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize them with four cauteries: on both corners of their head; and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	 The method of the cautery is done as previously described.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	 It has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more severe now; therefore, it should be treated with cold water.
Capitol .viii.	 Chapter VIII
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	 Of the cautery for oblivion done by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	 It is advisable that in the beginning, large jars and pills of wormwood be given to the patient for purging.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	 Then shave the head of the patient completely and place on his temples the plaster of cedar, as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	 And do this several times, for that is the manner of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	 And do so according to the order of physicians, as I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	 And thus, if he is cured well by this; but if not, then make three cauteries on the back of his head, which should descend from the highest part of the head into the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	 And place the thickness of a finger between each cautery, and then treat the cautery with cold water.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	 But if you see an increase and the patient is tolerant, then make a cautery in the middle of the head; and if there is greater increase, then cauterize on both temples. xspace
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	 "Now care for that opening so that it heals; and let the pointed cautery be olive-shaped according to the form given before.
Capitol .ix.	  Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	 "About the cauterization of hemorrhoids and the softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	 "Cut the hair on the patient's head with scissors and water as mentioned before; then shave the patient's head, and cauterize it with a pointed cautery in the middle of the head, and with a pointed cautery over all the corners of the head, and with a pointed cautery over the back part of them, and with three points over the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	 "And if it is necessary due to the illness of softening the body from too much heat and the illness is strong, then cauterize with four points over the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards with a point within until it is reddened by the skin, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	 "And now care for that opening so that it heals, and this should be an olive-shaped point.
Capitol .x.	 Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	 "About the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	 "An epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	 Certainly! Let's translate this line by line:
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	 And if it is a child who cannot tolerate medicine, then administer fortifying and nourishing liquids that cleanse the body for several days with an improvement in food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	 Then shave the patient's head and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previously mentioned method, and with another cautery on their occiput, and over each corner of the head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	 And if the patient is strong and enduring, then cauterize them with the aforementioned cauteries, having first made the body numb and softened it over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	 And let the cautery be olive-shaped as previously mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	 But if the patient is a child, then place a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter XI
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	 On the Cauterization of Melancholy
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	 When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and thick smoke, then cauterize it with the cauteries that we have mentioned, after making the body numb.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	 And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity that turns into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them water to drink that cleanses their brain according to what was mentioned earlier in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	 Here's my best attempt at translating the given text into English:
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	 And let the patient be seated in a chair, and held securely from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	 Then place an ointment; and it is more fitting to use one made from sheep fat.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	 And warm that over a moderate fire so that it can provide gentle warmth when applied to the patient.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	 Then place it on the middle of the patient's head in a circular shape, and let him be covered so that he is warmed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	 Do this with the patient once a week for as long as necessary according to his other treatment; or if you prefer, cauterize that area making small points according to his size, unless you have a cautery prepared in this way: this is the type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	 Then place that bandage soaked in fat or in linseed oil.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter .12
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	 On the cauterization of water running from the eye.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	 When you have recognized the onset of water in the eye by the signs I mentioned earlier, begin and give the patient something to drink that will dry out his head, and protect him from all moistures.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	 And make him soak in a bath of vinegar for some days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	 And command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; then cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of watering of the eyes in both eyes, or with one burn if it is the beginning of water in one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	 Cauterize with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are under the neck; and let the cauteries be in that place on the level of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	 And beware of blood flow when it is cauterized; and if you see any blood flow from him, stop it with some medicine that you have available.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	 And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and their obliteration, and caution against blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	 And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck under two bones with two well-prepared cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	 On Cauterizing Ancient Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	 When the tears of the eyes are persistent and through the veins and arteries that are in the obvious place on the head outside, and it is verified that this is superfluous phlegmatic humors, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries in the neck under both temples, and with two cauteries in the neck under both bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	 E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.
Capitol .xiiii.	 This line means "Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	 About the cauterization of a bad smell from the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	 When you treat that (patient) with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not help, then prepare and give the sick person garlic to drink for three nights; and next shave their head, and cauterize them with a midwife's cautery or an olive-oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	 And next, cauterize that (patient) with a carnation cautery and two cauteries on the eyebrows below the hair by a little.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	 And beware of the archery so as not to burn that (area).
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	 And this is the shape of the carnation cautery:
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter XV
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	 About the cauterization for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar cautery; and this is its shape:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	 And if you (wish to) cauterize that (patient), do so on the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in all parts, and let them be long from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	 And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	 And do not press too hard with your hand using the cautery, but according to the quantity by which the third section of the eyelid is burnt.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	 When the hair on the eyelid turns into three parts and closes the eye, use the cautery on the eyelid.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	 When the hairs on the eye turn inwards and close the eye, cauterization is done in two ways: either by burning or with a caustic medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	 If you are cauterizing with fire, tell the patient beforehand to pull out their eyelashes like those who pluck them, until they have grown back and been trimmed; and if it is necessary for their birth, then strengthen the eyes of the patient with a bandage so that they are not harmed until the hairs have grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	 Therefore, when they have grown back and been trimmed, place the patient's head on your lap, and then apply over the eyelids of his eyes a sign in the shape of a maple leaf, with the beginning of the sign close to the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	 And then place a cotton pad soaked in egg white or a paste of ptilium over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	 And then heat the pointed cautery which is of this form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	 And then cauterize on the figure which you have designated, little by little, in several places, until the surface of the coden is burned as if it were a myrtle leaf, clearly visible.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	 The sign of the healthiness of this work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already being contracted and the hairs around it raised due to the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	 And so raise your hand and leave it for three days, then place a compress with a border on it until the crust is removed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for that with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	 But if the hairs return for some reason to their original state and the eyelid is softened, then make another time the cautery on that same way as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	 But if the hairs are on the lower eyelid, then cauterize that until it is raised to its natural place and is healed, so that the hairs do not touch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 But the cauterizing medicine should burn this; you command the patient to pull out the hairs until they are elongated and healed. And then a piece of cloth in the shape of a myrtle leaf should be made.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	 Sure, let's break down the sentence into parts and translate it line by line:
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	 And place the cloth on the medicine, and press it slightly without moving until the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for the sting is in them as if from fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	 And so when he perceives that he has found the sting, then remove the medicine and apply it again with the cloth; and when the sting ceases, then reapply the medicine and wash the area with water; and at this point consider if you see the eyelid lifted as if it is washed with fire or incision, for then it is well; and if not, return to applying the medicine on the spot where it was not previously applied, without moving until your operation is completed and the wound is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	 And then place a bandage on the wound until the thread of the suture is removed, and then care for it with an ointment or another until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	 And it is necessary for you, in your operation, to guard with vigilant care that no remnant of the medicine falls into the wound, and if after several days the eyelid becomes softened and some hairs grow in the wound, then repeat your medicine on the spot where the eyelid is softened, just as you did at first, and then cover it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 "And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	 "And know that men's heels are diverse according to size and smallness, and thus your treatment is made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	 "And the path of correctness will not be hidden from one who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	 "On the cauterization of a fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	 "When you treat a fistula with the water that we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases and your treatment does not work, then you should cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place their head on your shoulder, and have someone hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it is not moved or shaken with the patient's head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	 "Then place a cotton ball soaked in egg white or birdlime over their eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "And then heat the cautery, of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	 "which should be hollow, like the shape of a reed or the quill of a vulture, with one end used to make the cautery.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	 "And if you wish, it may penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	 And if you wish, it could be like this.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	 However, that which is hollow is better for the work at hand.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	 Then press on the opening if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	 And if it is not open, then open it and extract the corruption from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	 Then place over it the cautery which should be well lit, and hold with that hand a little above the cautery of the mouth towards the nostril, so that your hand does not burn or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery in the gray matter of the brain and destroy it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	 And thus, if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice more, if necessary; and leave it so for three days, and then place a bandage on that spot and surround it with drying ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	 But if eleven days have passed and it is not healed, then place on it a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and then scrape it according to what is appropriate in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	 There is another method of cauterizing a fistula which some earlier said: take at the place of the fistula and open it up, and then insert into that opening a thin needle whose shape matches its own; and pour into it one ounce of melted lead; and hold with your hand a needle with good retention, so that the patient is not harmed because the melted lead does not reach the brain of that patient; and you should place on the head of the patient a cloth dipped in egg white or water, for lead attracts the place of the fistula and heals it by wonderful healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	 And if the fistula is healed with the water that we have mentioned for cautery and care, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a potion through the nose and reduce the fistula into the body of the nose according to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	 Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	 On Cauterizing the Split of the Feet.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	 Often these splits occur in the lips, and more frequently in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	 Therefore, when you treat those splits with the water that we mentioned in the divisions and your treatment is not effective, then burn it with a small cautery knife according to this form as follows:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	 And let its cavity be according to the sharpness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	 Then carefully place this (knife) into those splits until the cautery reaches the bottom of the splits.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat it with plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter XIX
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	 On Cauterizing a Fistula in the Mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 When an abscess forms in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth, and then it swells, and then it bursts, and then it becomes chronic, and pus runs out, forming a fistula. And if you treat this and the treatment is not effective, then you must burn with a cautery according to the amount that has been received in the fistula. And place the burning iron into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches its bottom. And at the end of it, do so once or twice; and then treat this with the water we have mentioned for treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	 And therefore if the wound is cut open and healed, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to uncover the area and remove the rotten bones as specified in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	 Chapter 20
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	 On the cauterization of teeth and the softening of veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	 When veins are softened by moisture and teeth are aching, and if medicines are applied to them but do not work, then place the head of the patient on your lap, and ignite the cautery in the shape which will be shown below, so that you place the small tube over the tooth and insert the heated cautery into it swiftly, holding the patient's mouth slightly open so that he may feel the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	 And then raise your hand, and then repeat the cauterization several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	 And then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, because the aching tooth is stopped and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	 "On the cauterization of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	 "When tooth pain is due to cold, or there is a blister or worm in it, and you cannot cure it with medicine, then cauterize the area according to two methods: either cauterize with cow's horn, or cauterize with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	 "To cauterize with horn, you take cow's horn and burn it in the bottom of an iron pan. Then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of the horn, then dip it into the burnt horn, and place it on the painful tooth immediately until it is numb.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	 "And then repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	 "And if you wish, dip wool or cotton in the aforementioned horn, and place it on the painful tooth, and then place a heated iron on top of it until the heat reaches the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	 "However, the cauterization with fire is that you pay attention to the needle of iron or steel, and it should be in the middle of it some thickness so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	 And then heat the cautery in the shape that is to come, and place it on the tooth until the cautery is heated; and do this several times because the pain will be reduced either on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	 And it is necessary that the patient, through the impression of that cautery, fills his mouth with good broth and holds it for an hour, and then rinses his mouth; and this is how to prepare the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	 And cauterize with whatever extreme method you wish, according to your ability.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	 And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter XXII
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	 On the Cauterization of Prolapse
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	 When prolapse is caused by phlegm and cold humors, and they are not compliant with digestion through medicines, and you desire the digestion of those [humors] somewhat, then heat the cautery in the shape as follows: having two openings so that smoke can escape from the cautery through one opening, and place the heated cautery on the prolapse once or twice more if necessary, until it reaches the base of the prolapse.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	 And if the prolapse is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the prolapse. And leave it for three days, and then place a compress soaked in broth on it until what the fire has burned off is reduced.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for him with ointments, bandages, and cloths until he is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	 And the shape of the cannula or cautery should be such that it can be used for that purpose.
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	 On Cauterization of Hoarseness and Constriction of the Throat
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	 When moisture comes to the canal of the lung, especially when it is accompanied by coldness and congestion, then the patient should first be evacuated with laxative medicines, and then you should cauterize him on the root of the throat in the depressed area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	 And take care not to go too deep with the cautery into the throat nor burn too much of its cord.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	 And then cauterize him with another cautery on the joint of the neck at his last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	 And let the cautery for him be prepared in the same manner as mentioned before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for him with the water mentioned earlier until he is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	 On Cauterization for Illnesses of the Lung and Cough
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	 When cough and lung illness are due to cold moisture and the patient has no fever or phlegm and the illness is chronic, then cauterize him with two cauteries on the furcula in the depressed areas called lion's eye and ox's eye; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between two nipples; and let the cauteries be prepared according to the form mentioned before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	 And if you wish, let your cautery be pointed with the cautery that is called "punctum," whose shape precedes in the treatment of earache pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 And place points within these [areas]; and then treat it with the remedy that has been prescribed until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	 And let the cauteries have three branches because the cauterization is done with it: in one go you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter XXV
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	 On Cauterization of the Tympanum, which is the head of the auditory canal.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	 When the head of the auditory canal is dislocated due to moist and lubricating humors and does not stay in place during its return, you must reduce its dislocation until it returns to normal, and then by a slight movement it can be relocated as it should be, as we have found. Therefore, first of all, reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient onto their back or side; then raise the handle which is in the concave part of the tympanum with your left hand's fingers, if the joint is dislocated towards the inside.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And then heat the cautery which has two tips, and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	 And then cauterize the tendon until it penetrates from one side to the other; and the figure of cauterization will be that of four tips.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 and make it subtle according to the number of tendons; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	 And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, and there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	 And then apply powdered salt to the cautery, and then make the patient lie down quietly, and let the limb not be moved for any time until it is soothed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	 And if the dislocation is in the upper part and is done late, then cauterize on the muscle with a pointed or sharp-pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is dried up and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	 On the Cauterization of the Stomach
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	 When there is cold and excessive moisture in the stomach, to the point where it is expelled from its place and many raumas are multiplied within him, and if you continue with the usual methods of treatment without success, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back, extend his hands and feet, and then cauterize with three cauteries: one cautery below the foot to the depth of a finger with a pointed cautery, and with two cauteries on both sides of the cautery, until you achieve a triangular figure; and make sure that those which are not properly adjusted will cause blistering.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	 And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the cord.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	 And let the figure of the cautery be according to this shape without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this shape; and let this be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this shape:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	 And let the stomach be punctured at that which is feared from this cautery: and it is that you know on the stomach point according to the quantity that you wish with trial, and then cauterize that with cautery in the points; and then heal that with the preceding healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	 Of the cautery of the cold foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	 When pain occurs in the foot due to cold or humidity or excessive flatulence until its normal state is restored by superfluous evacuation, and if the patient is cured with the water we have mentioned without contraindications, then it is necessary that the patient be placed supine on his back, and know with trial three cauteries according to this shape and this quantity placed on the foot below the hypochondria, which is the position of a man lying down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	 And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	 And do not press with the cauteries much.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	 And if the amount of water that has been held is the majority of the volume of the bladder and it is not more adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, having extended their thighs, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	 And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	 And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a pointed blade, when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	 And be careful not to press too much during the cauterization, and let the space of all the bladder be held so that the whole body is held and it enters into the intestines, because the bladder here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter .28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	 Of the piercing of an abscess in the foot with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	 When a swelling or abscess appears in the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tunica, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will feel heaviness and pain without sharpness.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	 And if it is in the lining of the liver, with pain that is very sharp and often exhausting for doctors to treat it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	 Therefore, the patient should be turned onto their back; and then locate the area of the abscess with a probe; and then heat the cautery that resembles a rag, whose shape is depicted on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	 And cauterize with that and cautery until the entire swelling is burned, until it reaches the pus, until there is a discharge.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	 Then treat it in the same way as for other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	 And it is not necessary to use this type of cautery except for those which are prolonged in the art of medicine and with which most patients have experience; but this has been tried a few times for this operation, yet nevertheless leave that one to us, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter .29
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	 On the Cauterization of Plasters.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	 The ancients said that cautery for the treatment of plasters should be made in this manner: and it is that you take from the dried roots of Aristolochia a long, dry root which is found, and it should be as thick as a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	 And then submerge that (area) in oil and light it on fire; then cauterize with a cautery at the location between the continuation of the clavicle and the neck; and with two small cauteries below, slightly declining towards the area beneath the chin, and with two cauteries on the area declining between the fifth rib and the tenth, slightly declining towards the back areas; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the back areas; and with one cautery at the location between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on both sides of the foot below the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	 And it is not necessary to cover your hand with the cautery, but it should be in plain view at the tip of the cord.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	 And some ancient authorities say that there are certain men who use a cautery of iron similar to a ray and ignite it, and insert it into the location between the ribs until they reach the abscess and expel the pus, as we have said in the case of the foot abscess.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	 But in this procedure with a cautery there is danger, for one may die immediately if it occurs in the location of an ulcer that has not healed.
Capitol .xxx.	 It seems like you're asking for help translating a sentence from an old text. However, you haven't provided the actual sentence that needs translation. Could you please provide the full sentence or paragraph that you need help with?
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	 "On the cauterization of the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	 "When you treat the illness of the spleen with water as we have described in the treatment section and your treatment does not work, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are correct. One of these is that you make three or four cauteries along the length of the spleen following the figure of the cauteries on the foot, the figure of which has been provided.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	 "And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and let the manner of the cauterization be the same as we have said for the cauteries on the foot.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	 "And do not press with your hand on the cauteries; and let the patient be lying on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	 "And there is another way to cauterize, which is that you heat the cauteries with two outpourings, as we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the rib that is in the place of the spleen so that the lying patient can receive it.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	 "And let your lifting with which you lift the rib be according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence into English:
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	 And then extract the cautery; thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	 If you see, cauterize with a cautery having three times.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	 Then take care of the cautery since it has been discarded for too many days, because it is more convenient than the other previous causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter .31
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	 On the Cauterization of Dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	 A cautery does not catch in dropsy except specifically in the bladder.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	 When you treat a dropsical patient with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary for him to be cauterized with four cauteries around the navel and with one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the ribs, and another cautery on the spleen, and with two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	 And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the membrane.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	 Then leave the cautery open, so that it may remain for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	 And do not evacuate the patient of treatment immediately after the cautery with water that is appropriate, for it should be added to him two intentions, and he will be healed quickly with healing aids.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	 The sentence means: "The shape of the cautery used for burning the abdomen should be pointed as described above, and the one used for burning the back should be olive-shaped as described earlier.
Capitol .xxxii.	 It appears that you provided the chapter or section number "Capitol .xxxii." rather than an actual sentence to translate. If there's a specific passage from the medieval medical treatise you would like me to translate, please provide it, and I'll do my best to assist you.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	 ### Translation:
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	 When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with water, it is necessary to cauterize the soles of the feet in the space between the auricular (little toe) and the anular (ring finger), lifting your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then lift your hand again, but do not completely withdraw it, because the dropsy will subside.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	 The cautery should be done in this manner: Then apply two cauteries to both sides, and in each side make a cautery with the tip of the knife-shaped cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	 And let the cautery be as long as the side: one under the armpit and the other in the middle of the side; and on each side, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	 And leave the wound open without dressing for a long time so that some water can drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	 Then treat him with those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter .xxxiii.  (This is likely indicating the beginning of a new chapter or section in the text.)
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	 On Cautery of the Abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	 When the abdomen is affected by cold and humidity to the point of weakening the virtues, which are the digestive and retentive virtues found in the stomach and intestines, it is treated with methods of cure and diet. Sometimes patients suffer from a cautery of virtue emerging, then cauterize that part with a large cautery on their stomach according to what has been mentioned previously in the cautery of the stomach, with circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a subtle nail-shaped cautery; and with a cautery on the bladder with a great amount, or with two cauteries.  (Note: The text uses some archaic terminology that may not have direct modern equivalents, such as "vertut" for vital power or faculty, and "alcatin" which seems to refer to the urinary bladder.)
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	 Sure, let's translate the text line by line:
Capitol .xxxiv.	 It seems like you're starting a new section or chapter, as indicated by "Capitol" which is likely a typo for "Chapter" in Latin ("Capitulum"). The ".xxxiv." suggests this is Chapter 34. So the translation would be:
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	 "On the Cauterization of Old Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	 "When there is in nature behind old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors or corrupted humidity, and they are treated with the water we mentioned in the division and the cure does not take effect, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus below the small of the back, making them triangular and small, and with a cautery above the navel passing through two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	 "And if you suspect that his stomach is chilled and his food is not well-cooked, and his face appears pale, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the ankle, and with another cautery on his spleen with a pointed cautery. Leave the cautery open for some time, and then heal him within so that he is cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter 35
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	 "On Cauterization Near the Absence of Atrophy
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	 "When you cut away atrophy, then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	 "Then insert that heated [cautery] into the cut atrophy and continue with your hand until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And perform this one or two times, because if they are excessive, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and then cure those with something suitable from the ointments until it is healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	 And if you cauterize with a large cautery on some part of the body, it will be more beneficial for healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 Chapter .xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	 On the Cautery of Fistulas that are formed naturally in their parts.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	 When nature does not obey the work we have recounted in its place, and the patient is terrified by this, let him be healed with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	 Therefore, when someone has an old fistula naturally, and it is full of corrupt humors and putrid moisture, what is most fitting to do is to probe it with a subtle probe, and then determine the depth of it with the aforementioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	 Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray (of sunlight).
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	 And then place that heated cautery into this fistula, according to the depth at which you inserted the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 And repeat with the cautery until those corrupt bodies are burned, once or twice or three times, depending on your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	 And be careful not to burn the nerves or the veins; or if there is a fistula in the bladder or the intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it will not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	 And if the area is sealed, and the matter has been removed from it, and it remains that way for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	 And if the matter is not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the bone of it is corrupt, or this happens for one of those reasons which will be remembered in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	 On the Cautery of Hemorrhoids
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	 When there is pain in the hemorrhoids due to cold or excessive ventosity, and because of this the patient's blood is thinned, then it is necessary to cauterize that above the hemorrhoids with a cautery on each hemorrhoid, using a needle from which you will take the memory.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	 And strongly cauterize with the second one a little below, so that three lines of cautery will be made, and thus they will be more durable in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Based on the context of medieval medical treatises and the similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, I'll attempt to translate the text line by line. Here's the translation for "Capitol .xxxviii.":
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	 "On the Cautery of the Bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	 When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and moisture, to the point that the patient cannot hold urine, then cauterize them in the part below the bladder, where the pubic hairs begin. Cauterize with a pointed instrument on the right side, and with another on the left side of the patient.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	 And let the length of each pointed instrument be according to the amount of cold in the patient's body; and cauterize them with a pointed instrument in the lower back area, or with two instruments if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	 And let the pointed instrument be sharpened according to the nature of the process.
Capitol .xxxix.	 Chapter .xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	 "On the Cautery of the Uterus.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	 When cold and moisture occur in the uterus, preventing conception, corrupting menstrual flow, delaying their onset, and causing pain during menses, then the area should be cauterized with three pointed instruments around the navel, as we have said in the case of bladder cautery; and with a pointed instrument below the lower back, or two if necessary. And let the points be sharpened.
Capitol .xl.	 I apologize, but the text you provided is not in any language that resembles Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be a nonsensical string of words and symbols. If you have a different text you would like me to try translating, please provide it.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	 "On the Cauterization for Ankle Dislocation.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	 "When moistness is infused into the ankle area and it causes displacement from its place, the sign of this is that one leg appears longer than the other when they are compared.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	 "And the location of the dislocation is found where there is swelling.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	 "Therefore, you should cauterize the patient on the ankle area with a round-shaped cautery, for you will have sensed it in the circle around the area as it turns, and thus the area will fall exactly in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	 "And let the cautery be of a similar form to that used for stomach cauterization.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	 "And if this type of cautery is not available to you, then use three small olive-shaped cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "And the cautery should be made according to the size of the entire cord; and then care for it so that it may heal.
Capitol .xli.	 "Chapter XLI
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	 "On the Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	 When pain occurs in the groin area and is caused by coldness and moisture, the patient should be treated with the water we have mentioned, not with oil. If this treatment is old, then you must rid the patient of thick humors using foul-smelling pills or artificial pills; then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	 The method of cauterization in this case is done in two ways: either cauterize with burning medicines or cauterize with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	 According to two known methods, one of which involves cauterizing that area on the patient's groin with three triangular cauteries, as shown in this form; and make good depth with them.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	 And let the space between each cautery be the width of a fingertip, whether the cauteries are olive-sized or larger.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	 However, sometimes the cauteries should be placed in the middle of the groin, at the top of the thigh, because there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	 And if you wish, you can cauterize with the circle that precedes the form in the cauterization of hip dislocation, which is a continuous circle and burns the tip of the entire groin.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	 And this is the method of cauterization for hip pain when it is localized to the groin and has not spread into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	 Here's the translation of the sentence:
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	 And if you are using a cautery knife, ensure that the depth of the cautery corresponds to the thickness of the patient's tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	 And if the patient indicates that the pain has spread to another part of the body near the feet, then cauterize that area with a cautery through three points or four, or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	 And if the patient indicates that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize that area with a cautery knife.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	 And be careful in all cauterization that you do not damage the nerves or large blood vessels with the cautery, as this could cause harm or contraction to the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	 And I have seen one and another of these cases where they cauterized the ankle and ended up in the cauterization by causing swelling in the leg until the tumor reached the foot, and it was perforated and completely rotten.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	 And this causes a very strong bellyache, and can lead to death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	 And if the pain is in two places at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	 And the wise say about cauterization of water, which is done in this manner: make a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its holes be according to the thickness of a fingertip or less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And within that circle, there should be another third; and the space between them should be the width of a finger; and those circles should be opened from two sides; and the length of those cuts should be one or two fingers wide, and make on those edges an iron hoop decently prepared in the circles; and this is its form.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	 Then it should be heated in the fire until it turns red and begins to spark, and then it should be placed on the open wound, with the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	 And so cauterize that part with three round cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then leave that for three days; then bandage that with gauze and leave the wound open for several days; and then treat that with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	 Abu Qasim (Abulcasis) says: O children, of this type of cautery we have used little because of the fear of its effects, and because few are those who know how to manage it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	 But from these cauteries, those who have suffered them and find with them their place (in the body).
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	 But cauterize with medicinal adhesives, making two circles that have a perforated armlet in which they place the iron hoop; let the length of the wall be one or two fingers wide, and those (circles) should be high as needed.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	 And if the spaces which are between each finger's thickness are opened from below and above, and if they contain themselves within them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	 And immediately place the patient on their side with the ankle part raised, and press your hand on the ankle part; then take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and make sure that its heat is gradually increased, and keep this for about one hour, until the patient endures the biting and burning sensation — because this remedy is like a fire — until the biting sensation subsides.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	 Then immediately lift your hand with the instrument and wipe away all the hot water from the entire ankle with cool water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	 Then let it rest for three days and place a bandage on it until the blackness of the burn is removed. Let it rest like this for some more days, and the pain will subside; this is beneficial in the end.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then care for it with ointments until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	 And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a statue of him that contains water in the same way as it is done with the ankle.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	 And this is the manner of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	 Take equal parts of alkali and soda, mix them together and place them in a new vessel, leaving an opening for the air to escape according to the amount that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	 Then place another inverted vessel under the first one, and pour over it two spoonfuls of living water onto the alkali and soda. After compressing them well with your hand, let the acrid water flow into the lower inverted vessel.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	 Then collect all that water and pour it over more living water and renewed alkali, because at that time it will have great sharpness, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, for it has a burning effect.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	 And some of the medicines with which it is cauterized are, for example, tea tree and honey, as well as soda.  And they must be mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	 And a certain man of the ancients recounted an operation and cure with which water pain and sciatica are cured, and he said that it was very effective, and that no other cure is necessary, because it is healed once and for all as he recounts. For he makes him enter a bath and immediately he comes out of it healthy.  (Note: The text appears to describe hydrotherapy or some form of water-based treatment for pain relief.)
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	 And it is that a certain plant called vert should be taken, and if vert cannot be found, then take a fresh fig; and everything should be crushed with a little bit of gray (salt) and placed on the spot where the pain is, either in the cavity or on the thigh, and let it rest.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	 And let it be left for a duration of three hours, or for however long the patient feels relief from the pain.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	 And then immediately place them in a bath and as soon as their body is warmed up, remove them from the water, because the pain will cease and they will be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	 And know that it is not advisable to use cautery with these medicines except to promote the body's evacuation (of humors).
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	 However, Hippocrates said that when the vein known as vena streptica is cauterized with a goat's hair, it will be of great benefit to the patient; and the cautery should be done in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the fingers.  (Note: "fossil" here likely refers to the space between the fingers, not the mineral.)
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	 And then take a dry goat's hair and singe it with fire until it is turned to charcoal; and then place it on the wool and leave it there until it is extended.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	 And then you should continue doing this, and do not stop until the feeling of biting penetrates to the bone and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	 And this manner of using the cautery is called "cautery with cupping.
Capitol .xlii.	 Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	 On the Cauterization of Back Pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	 Sometimes pain in the back is caused by various reasons, such as fall or injury, or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, due to the infusion of cold and moist material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	 Cauterization is only effective in this particular case which is caused by the infusion of cold material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	 Therefore, it is necessary to first evacuate the patient with purgative pills and similar ones that are made on the back where the pain is located in three lines according to its width, since in each line you can make ten cauteries or more, depending on the patient's tolerance and the strength of the fire.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	 And the cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	 And if you wish, you can cauterize with three or four middle-sized nails, like this:
Capitol .xliii.	 It appears that you provided only the chapter or section number without any actual text to translate. If you provide a full sentence from the medieval medical treatise, I'd be happy to attempt a translation for you!
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	 This means "About Cautery at the Beginning of Jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	 Here's a line-by-line translation:
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	 "And you will find in the last vertebra of the back and the buttocks of the patient that it begins to protrude over the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	 "And therefore when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery like this:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	 "so that the cautery covers all parts of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	 "And if you wish, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery, two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	 "And let the points be close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	 "And care for the area until it is healed with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	 "But beware that a cautery should not be administered in an area affected by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	 "Chapter XLIV
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	 "On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	 "When joint pains are caused by cold humors that infiltrate each member of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout specifically.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	 "And therefore when gout caused by cold is treated and the pain does not subside, then apply a cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	 And it is that you cauterize that appropriate evacuation around the joint of the foot with small cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And it should be an olive-shaped cautery, which looks like this:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	 And if the pains rise into the teeth or other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize that (pain) on each tooth with three or four cauteries all around with this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	 And if the small cauteries that you need are not available, then cauterize with these and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand; only as much as needed to touch the surface of the skin.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	 And if the pain rises into the tooth and the back, then administer the cautery which we mentioned in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	 And if the pain is only in the hands, and it is called suagra, then prick in the circle of the fingertips like this: prick in these two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	 And if there remains pain in the said places, then prick around the fingertips on each finger and at the tip of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	 And if the pains increase over several days in the shoulders or muscles, then cauterize each of them throughout all parts of the aid.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	 And you do not expel the patient from good care and the reception of medicines, for if good care is taken and heat is expelled with this cautery, he will be cured, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	 Chapter 45
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	 Of the Cauterization of Ruptures
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	 When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestines protrude through the hernia, and this begins to happen, it is necessary for you to instruct the patient to stop eating on that day and use lenitive agents so that the opening of his belly does not increase.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	 And then follow the patient between your hands over his back, and command him to hold his breath until it is passed or the hernia or the intestines appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	 And then return to him with these words and signs, trying to reduce the hernia over the pubic bone, signaling the edge of which resembles half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And then heat the cautery whose form is this:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	 "Until it is red and sparks are emitted.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	 Here's a translation of the given text into English:
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	 Here's the translation for the given sentence:
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	 And then press the cautery against that mark with your hand, keeping the cautery straight, and drive it in until you reach the bones of the phalanx into the middle of the duodenum; and repeat with that again if you did not achieve it in the first attempt to enter the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	 And observe carefully the position of the intestine during your cautery, to avoid burning it, lest the patient suffer death or other serious illness.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	 And know that when you do not touch the bones with the cautery, your operation will be ineffective.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	 And it is necessary for the cautery of children to be delicate according to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	 Then care for the cauterized area for three days with bandages until the scab from the fire is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for that area with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	 And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the area and the wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	 And it is necessary to provide the patient's nutrition according to the duration of their treatment, which fills their stomach and prevents the intestine from coming out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	 And then when it is time to lift after approximately forty days, administer a gentle ointment and keep it there for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	 And let him refrain from work and from overindulgence in food and drink, as well as from loud voices, for when he follows this complete healing regimen, he will surely be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	 And I will describe the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if you wish to prevent them from recurring, cauterize the rupture with a rounded cautery according to its size, so that it is burned out just like the third part of it; and then treat it as we have said, and it will not reoccur.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	 And some say that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery like this, because it is marked with a cross.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	 And a line is drawn that runs along the latitude of the back above the rupture, and another line above it; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	 Chapter .xlvi.  (or Chapter 46)
De cauterizacio de torcio.	 On the Cauterization of Hernia.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	 When pain occurs in certain members due to a fall or blow and this pain persists for a long time without improving with medicine, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	 And the size of the cautery should be appropriate for each member according to its magnitude and smallness, as well as its virtue, openness, and the location of the pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	 Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on that spot; for it is customary for those pains to be transferred from one member to another nearby, so you must achieve this with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter 47
De cauterizacio de lepra.	 On the Cauterization of Leprosy
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	 Some lepers are cured with a cautery to great benefit, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	 Therefore, when you want to cauterize that [type of leprosy], consider if the leprosy is common and of that kind which we have said in the division, and do not say this one or that one, and fear for the patient that the corruption may affect his entire body and all its parts. In such a case, you should cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second below it, even to the forehead at the hairline; and both on two temples; and one behind, either on the nape or the crown of the head.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	 And finally, use the cautery with your hand to make a slight indentation on the bone, thereby relieving the pressure of the accumulated humors, allowing for the release of large vapors from the body; and cauterize over the spleen as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	 And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears clearly, then you should cauterize with those cauteries that we mentioned on the head; and cauterize at the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both cheeks, and with two cauteries on the two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the two vertebrae of the back, and with one large one on the vertebrae near the ribs, and one on the ribs, and with two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and with two on the wrists, and one on each wrist, and with two on the elbows, and two on the armpits, and two on the soles of the feet; and cauterize over all the joints of the fingers of the hands and the feet, and over each heel of the feet, and over the knuckles of the fingers.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	 And be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the heel.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	 And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the anus.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	 And know that the more precisely you apply cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery itself, as long as their body is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	 And it is appropriate that the cauteries be large or small depending on the members and the joints, according to what has been prescribed by the types of tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat the cautery with flour mixed with honey and with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	 Chapter .48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	 On the Cauterization of Stupor (or Coma).
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	 When a certain member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member, whether it is large or small.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	 And let your cautery enter a little into the spine.  (In this context, "spine" likely refers to the spinal cord rather than the vertebrae.)
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat that area with ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	 E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	 But do not assume this [procedure] unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit points of the nerves that move throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	 Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	 On Cauterization of Varicose Veins
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	 When varicose veins are old and you do not administer any of the medicinal ointments to them, then cauterize it with a cautery for a little while, according to the size of the vein's cord until its whiteness and color are removed, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	 Then care for it with a poultice of barley flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and rue leaves, and with the blood of a dove or pigeon, each being one part, and all mixed together. Then a cloth should be soaked in this mixture and placed on the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	 Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	 On Cauterization of Cancer
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	 When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it extends.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	 And the wise have said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the lesion; but I have not seen this, because I fear it will cause an ulcer, and I have seen this happen sometimes.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	 And it is more appropriate that the patient be cauterized around the affected area with a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	 Chapter 1
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	 Of the Cautery for the Weakened (or Infirm).
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	 When someone is delayed in their healing process, whether due to the excess of the remedy used on them, or because of the patient's condition being old and weak, with little blood, or due to the time, and you wish to hasten the healing of this person; then cauterize around the affected area with multiple small cauteries; and thus leave it so that it may hasten in its healing.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	 However, if you wish to pierce the area with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose form is this: and place it in the middle of the affected area until it penetrates deeply.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you place the cautery in that lower part of the arm, so that the body of the arm is relieved; then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	 Chapter 2
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	 Of the Cautery for Corrosive Ulcers (or Erosion).
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	 A corrosive ulcer is a corruption that moves through the member, which eats away at it like fire consuming dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	 When you see that area being eroded due to the application of a hot cautery iron, then heat the cautery iron with very few and large nails, according to what is appropriate for that area being eroded.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	 Then cauterize the entire affected area until you have completely eliminated all the corrosion and left no trace of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	 Then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized areas linen cloth soaked in oil until all the scabs have fallen off and all the corruption has been eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	 Then treat it with a flesh-generating ointment.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	 But if after three days you see that healthy flesh is growing in the area where there was no corruption, then it is good; however, if not, then repeat the cautery on the areas where there is still corruption.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	 And erosion can be treated sometimes with sharp medicine, because that works in place of a cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	 However, cauterization by fire is more effective against pus.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	 And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicine in the appropriate section, so take that when you need to use it.
Capitol .liii.	 Chapter 53
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	 "About the cauterization of wounds and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	 "Many times it is necessary to apply heat to the wound beneath the afflicted foot known as a sore or ulcer, which is large and deep; this wound affects the foot. Cauterization in these cases can be done in two ways: by fire and by hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	 "However, cauterization by fire involves heating the cautery like a vulture's beak, which should be made of iron according to the size of the entire wound from all sides, and should be of fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	 "Then place that heated instrument on the wound and turn your hand with the cautery around the edge of the wound until it reaches the depth of the wound.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	 "And leave it there for three days until it begins to form a scab.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	 "And then apply a plaster made of crushed wild mallows mixed with salt on it, and leave the plaster on for one night, because that will heal it from its root.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	 "And then treat the area with flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	 "And if it does not heal, and often this occurs on the surface of the body, mainly in the hands and feet, then you should apply cauterization with hot water to those areas. This involves taking a small tube made of bronze, iron, or vulture's beak and placing it on the wound; then pour a little hot water into the tube, hold your hand steady, and rotate the tube with pressure from your hand all around, pressing the edge of the tube against the root of the wound, so that the hot water reaches the core of the wound. Wait for the patient to feel the burn of the hot water for an hour, then remove it, as the wound with its roots will be healed.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	 And thus it is done with these, and then another enters who will come over all of them that are in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	 And then cure those as soon as the causes of the nails have been eradicated with ointments that generate new skin.
Capitol .liiii.	 Chapter .43.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	 On Cautery for Tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	 When someone has a tremor due to cold in the nerves or due to a fever of similar cause, then you should cauterize them with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and with a cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, with an olive-shaped cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	 And their tremor will subside and the healing of the cold disease will hasten.
Capitol .lv.	 Chapter .55.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	 On Cautery for Sudden Accidents in the Body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	 When there are sudden breakouts on the body, and they are pustules or splits made of thick, corrupt matter; then at the beginning of their appearance, it is necessary that they be cauterized all over the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with a myrtle handle, the end of which is extended with fire; or with long, thin razors; or with lens-shaped cauteries. ️
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	 Certainly! Let's translate this line by line:
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	 "However, it is necessary that this be done after an evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	 In the case of pain in the joints caused by cold humors, which infiltrate each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands. However, it is necessary that this be done after an evacuation with phlebotomy.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	 "On the cauterization of blood flow caused by an arrow wound.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	 "When a wound from an arrow is seen to be bleeding due to the cut of the wound itself, or because of the beginning of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and it appears similar, and it is difficult for that to remain.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	 "Therefore, when this happens to someone, you should immediately press with your hand on the opening of the arrow wound, and place your finger firmly over it until the bleeding stops, without allowing any blood to escape.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	 "And then place the olivewood cauteries, both small and large, in the fire, in sufficient quantity, and blow on them until they are red hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	 And immediately take one of the small or large needles according to the location and wound where the artery has been cut, quickly apply pressure to that vein after you have removed the tourniquet, and continue cauterizing until the blood flow is stopped and restricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	 And if blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove the tourniquet and pull out the cautery, then immediately take another hot cautery from those prepared in the fire, and continue doing this until the bleeding is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	 And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, lest another illness come upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	 And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those cases except by one of four methods: either by cauterization as we have said, or by extraction if it has not yet been extracted, because when it is extracted the limbs are better burned and the blood flow is stopped; or it may be tied with thread or a ligature with strong tension, or medicines that have the property of stopping blood flow may be placed on it; and they should be strengthened with a cushion with proper pressure.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	 "But he who administers restriction should do so with discretion and with constraint using cloth or by position due to causes of burning and similar symptoms, do not perform this [procedure] until late.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	 "But if this needs to be done for someone and neither the physician nor any medicine is present, then apply the aforementioned dressing over the openings of that vein as we have said, understanding that great pressure must be applied to stop the blood from the main source of the wound, and do not remove the dressing; and over the dressing, pour very cold water until the blood is congealed and thickened; and beware that one may need a cautery or necessary medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	 "The second section begins.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	 "Of incisions, perforations, and bloodletting, and of phlebotomy, and of wounds, and their similar conditions.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	 "These are the words of Al-Zahrawi (Abulcasis).
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	 "We have already said in the first chapter about every ailment in which it is suitable to use a hot iron or burning medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for this, with the shapes of the cauteries; and I have arranged the chapters from the top of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	 E io procederò in questo capitolo nella stessa maniera, affinché il richiedente venga sollevato da ciò, cioè da quanto avrà richiesto.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	 And before I begin this, it is necessary, son, that you learn that in this chapter it is about the same thing as in the first chapter of cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	 And because it is necessary that there be great care in this, for the operation which is very often seen in this chapter, namely evacuation by blood, which is with the blood in which life exists, you must have the aspiration of the vein or incision over the abscess, opening of a fistula, cleansing of the wound, extraction of an arrow, or incision of a stone, and similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	 And all these are accompanied by fear, trembling, and even death for the majority.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	 And I warn you not to fall into this situation, for sometimes it happens that you must manage patients with many illnesses in a manner similar to men who are very ill.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	 And some of them will die from their illness, and it is a light thing for him to die, and this because of the severity of what he finds in his illness, and because of the length of his illness, and with the illness there is fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence into English:
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	 And therefore it is not necessary for you to consent in that person who comes to you with this manner; and let your caution be greater than haste and greed; and do not presume any cause over this without appropriate certain knowledge which verifies what you need to do, and to whom a praiseworthy succession occurs.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	 And use in the treatment of all your patients prediction and indication for him to whom health is converted, because on that [patient] is your help towards acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	 Oh, sons, God grant you his understanding and do not take away your guidance and protection from you, for this is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	 And I have organized this chapter by sections following the previous section on cautery, from the treatment of the head to the feet, so that what you seek and need about this may be made easier for you.
Capitol primier.	 Chapter one.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	 About the treatment of water which is contained in the heads of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	 Know that this illness frequently afflicts infants due to birth and when the nurse tightly binds the infant's head without gentleness.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	 And sometimes it happens for hidden causes which are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	 Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz;
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	 And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and the child's head was always so enlarged that he could not put anything on himself because of the size of his head, and more than the humidity increased until the fire died out.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	 And this humidity is either added between the skin and the bone, or it is accumulated beneath the bone on the hip.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	 Because the operation in this case, where the humidity is between the skin and the bone and the abscess is small, requires that you cut into the middle of the head with an incision in the latitude, and let the length of the incision be two nights until the humidity flows out, and this is the form of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 And therefore, if the humidity has increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two incisions here according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	 And if the humidity is beneath the bone, the sign of it is that you see all the sutures of the head open on all sides and the water is squeezed out when you press that area with your hand from within, and nothing remains hidden to you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 It is necessary that you cut into the middle of the head with three incisions according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	 Certainly! Let's translate the provided sentence line by line:
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	 This sentence seems to describe another method of incision in the context of treating an abscess or boil (apostema). Here's a line-by-line translation:
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	 And observe that you do not cut the artery, lest it causes bleeding and the patient dies from that loss of blood along with the evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	 Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	 Of the incision of the arteries that are near the ears, called "hilasseysse".
Capitol segon.	 Chapter Two
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	 When there occurs some catarrh or rheum in the eyes or feet and it is old, and one does not benefit from medication, then the final cure for this is the incision of these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	 Therefore, when you wish to incise those (arteries), have the patient raise their head and press the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulsates; and on each of these places, which are near the ears, press, and they will be hidden in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	 And then make an incision on the artery with a probe, and then incise each one with the spatula that has been cut sharp for the incision, going into the bone, and let it be thus throughout the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	 And if you wish, introduce the spatula below the artery and break it at the incision points above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	 And let the length of the incision be two fingers wide, for when some vein is cut, the blood flows out with a pulsating exit, which jumps outside with frequent jumps.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	 But if the artery is not visible at first glance, then you should measure from the ear the length of three fingers, and then probe with a needle, until it reaches the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	 And the amount of blood that should be drawn is one-sixth of a pint, and it should be done lightly, neither more nor less, all according to the strength of the patient and the fullness of their artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 And then consider the wound, and if there is any cause of splintering on the bone, cut it open so that a hot abscess does not develop.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then strengthen the wound with bandages and linen cloths, and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	 Chapter III
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	 On the extraction of temples' arteries.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	 When someone has an old or acute migraine, due to humid and acidic qualities in the temples, or severe and similar pain, and it is not cured by the usual medical treatments, then we have recourse for these ailments to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or their cauterization, as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	 And the manner of the operation and extraction of these is that the patient shaves the hair on their temples; and consider the apparent arch in the temple, for it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden except in a few men due to the intensity of cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	 And if it is hidden to you, then let the patient's neck be tightened with some cloth; and immediately heat the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the arch appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And then take the spoon, which has this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	 And then you scrape the membrane with that instrument until you reach the arch; and then you pour oil on it and extract it from the upper parts until you have removed it from the membrane and uncovered it from all the tissues that surround it.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	 But if the artery is subtle, then wrap it with the tip of the oncii (a type of hook or probe), and then cut off a piece according to the length of its extremities and their contraction, and there will be no flow of blood, for if not cut, the blood will not rise entirely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	 And then proceed to evacuate some of the blood, approximately one to three pints.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	 And if the wound is large, then you should bind it in two places with a strong double-layered bandage or with ropes, and do not allow it to become infected before the wound heals, lest there be bleeding.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	 And then incise the superfluous part that is between two ligaments; do this at that time or shortly thereafter.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	 And if you wish, cauterize it with a pointed cautery to the bone with a lancet until its extremities are incised, and this will take the place of that same procedure.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	 And this is a better procedure if the patient has a fever or is suffering from inflammation, for cauterization helps to expel moisture, and thus it is more beneficial in treatment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	 And it is appropriate to clean the wounds and cover them with clean cloths, and then treat them with dry medicines that promote the growth of flesh and bandages until they are healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 And if while you are working and another time bleeding occurs from the wound, then you must hasten to stop that blood flow, either with a cautery or by packing the wound tightly, and keep your hand pressed until the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	 And if no cause of that is present to you, then place your finger on the spot until the blood clots, and rinse the spot with very cold water until the sharpness subsides, and apply a compress as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	 And the easiest way to remove an arrow from the body is to cauterize the vein with this two-pronged cautery. First, feel for both ends of the arrow and place each prong, very hot, until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that what is between the ends of the arrow is lengthened, as they are not completely solidified by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	 And this is how the cautery looks:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	 And let the sharpness of the two prongs be equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	 However, if the sharpness of one prong is less than that of two prongs, it is better because if they are both very sharp and close to each other, they may cut the flesh too quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	 Therefore, when there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire remains in them and the flesh is cut gently.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	 And this method is better for all tasks and easier.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	 And let the space which is between two fingers be equal to the thickness of the said finger.
Capitol quart.	 Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	 Of the care for the body from acute and acid tears of the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	 When the tears are acidic and it affects those veins that are on the top of the head outside, do not apply any medicine for its care. And sometimes the face of the patient is reddened and feels tingling, as if there were ants walking on their forehead, and the eyes of such a person are weakened, moist to the point that their lashes are falling out, and the eyelids are cut by the sharpness of the tears. The ancient physicians used this operation for the care of these cases, and they named this care with the sponge.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	 And you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then you cut into the forehead three equally spaced slits according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	 And if the length of the slit is two fingers: let one slit be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the slight movement of the eyelids that are near the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	 And beware of the beginning of the arteries that are in two places, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	 And if the space of each incision is three times the size of a thumb's width, adjust it accordingly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	 And if you have a sponge prepared or very dry cloths with which to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	 And then insert the spatula with two pointed ends, this is the shape of his incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	 which begins at the temples and extends to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	 Remove all the skin that is between two incisions, and scrape with the scalpel on the bone, then do this from the middle of one incision to the other.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	 And then insert this spatula into the first incision again, and introduce another instrument which is called a lancet, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	 Place the sharp side against the skin next to the skin, and the other side against the bone, and use it to cut until you reach the middle crack, and with it cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	 It seems that the text is discussing the process of creating or managing an incision. Here's my line-by-line translation:
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	 And since a large quantity of blood is lost, press the places where the blood clots are.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	 And then place in each crack a piece of old cloth, and place over those clumps mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that it does not become an infected abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	 And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of hot water or tea, and then treat it with an ointment made of basil, rose oil, and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	 Chapter V
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	 Of the care of tears by catharsis and of the ulcers that descend from the inner parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	 When someone has a severe and persistent catharsis, and the patient's eyes are weakened and shrunken, and their vision is impaired, and the eyelids have ulcers and their hair falls out, and there is sharp pain in the front of the head with consequent protrusion, then know by these symptoms that the humors and catharsis come only from the small veins of the inner parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	 And the best treatment for this is as follows: tell the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in the middle of the forehead, a small one in size (and begin with the incision from the left temple towards the right; and let the incision go into the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples which are good for chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	 "Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then fill between the two lips of the wound with old cotton or linen rags.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 "And then cover it tightly with powder mixed in wine and oil, so that an abscess does not form.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	 "And when you release it and see that the abscess has already diminished, then it is necessary to rub the bone within until flesh begins to grow on it, and then treat it with a drying regimen which will make the flesh grow, such as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from them make a plaster and apply it to these wounds for the growth of new flesh.
Capitol .vi.	 "Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	 "On the treatment of that which falls into the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	 "Everything that falls into the ears is of one of four kinds: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to stone, such as iron and glass; or it is from a plant, such as a grain of millet or a bean; or it is a liquid thing, such as water and sour wine and things similar to them; or some small animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	 It seems that the text is discussing a remedy for earaches or similar issues. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	 And next, place some pieces of cloth or wool in the circumference of the ear, and extend the ear to its original position above, because swollen parts are often healed with these remedies.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if it is not healed, then administer an extraction using the instrument called "subtle gesti epicicarios," which has this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	 And if it is healed with the instrument, it is good; and if not, then administer an extraction using a thin needle of minimal thickness.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	 And thus, if it is not healed by this method, then make a cannula of iron and insert the tip of the cannula into the hole in the ear, and close around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that only the cannula remains open.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	 And then extract it with your breath using strong suction, for this is often done in the manner we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	 But if it is not healed in this manner, then take some alum or wax with which birds are caught, and place a small amount on the tip of a reed, and then wrap a clean cloth around that reed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	 And then proceed to insert it in the ear canal gently, and then dry the ear of moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	 And so if not forgotten with all the causes we've mentioned, then cut it before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	 And the way to cut it is that you first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein according to their strength, and then have someone squeeze it between your hands and turn the ear towards its parts, and make a small incision at the back of the ear in a well-pinned place.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 And let the incision be in the shape of a crescent until it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then immediately close the incision at that time, and care for it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	 And if the cause of the condition in the ear is one of the growths that grows and swells, then administer treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not obey you at once, then take fine white wax like this:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	 And administer with that the poultice of that herb which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	 And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the steam of the ear, and place that in many places, and then remove those with tweezers or with a delicate gesture, or as we have said, because its removal is relieved.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	 But in the case of water that has entered the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze at the beginning with some condition, and fill his ear with some old cloth, and pour over that ear in which there is water, and if by this it is expelled, it is good; and if not, then take some small heated stones according to the length of the finger, and heat them a little in the fire, and the patient should insert one of these into the hole of his ear and jump on one foot from that side and strike with another stone on the stone that is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	 Therefore, do not stop with a stone until all the water is expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	 And when the water has been expelled, take a piece of paper or cloth and insert one end into the ear, and extend the other end with fire until it is burnt to the middle.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	 And then place another bag and do this as many times until all the water has been expelled, and pierce that with a cannula as mentioned above about the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	 However, in the case of a foreign body entering that ear canal, if it is a small object, similarly pierce and extract it as we have mentioned in the section above; but if it is a large object that causes pain within the head, then administer its extraction with tweezers and scissors, and the cause will be lighter than all other causes entering the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	 But in the extraction of a worm generated within the ear, when you treat it with water as we have mentioned in the section and in the treatise on distillations and your treatment does not work, then you should look at the ear towards the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And therefore if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract it with tweezers or fine scissors; but if no cause appears, then take a cannula that is narrow at the tip and wider above, which has this shape.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	 And insert the narrow tip into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck out strongly with it, and do this many times until all the worms have been expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	 Sure, let's translate the text line by line:
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And it should be your instrument with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this tool, which looks like this:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	 And make it of silver or iron, narrow at one end, with a small hole at the other end and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	 And so that it fits well in the cavity of the ear canal where it will be needed.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	 And if you wish, take a rag and wrap it around the end of the tool nicely, then pour oil into the cavity of the ear opening, or juice from some herb, or water with any of these medicines in the tube — which is in the ear —, then insert the rag-wrapped tool on top and press gently with your hand until the oil is released into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	 And what is inserted into the ear should have been heated slightly by fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	 And be sure that what you insert into the ear is not too cold, because ear medications do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	 Chapter VII
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	 Of the care for earwax in the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	 Sometimes some infants are born with the bellies of their mothers not yet healed, and this also happens in some men, there is swelling in the flesh of the ear due to injury or something stuck in it; and sometimes this swelling occurs at the edge of the hole of the ear where it cannot see daylight, and sometimes it is on the outside parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	 And that which occurs in his brain, and cannot be understood by others, is among the most difficult conditions to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	 And in that situation where you can understand the patient's speech, it is advisable to place the patient's ear towards the sun and observe them.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if you see an apparent swelling, open it with a thin spatula that matches its shape.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	 If the affected area is small and one side is sharp while the other is not, use a spatula that is two finger widths wide to avoid damaging the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	 And if the swelling is due to excess flesh in the ear or nostril, then use a thin knife and cut away the flesh until all of it has been removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	 And if the swelling is in the ear's brain, then take a thin reed and heat it with fire for a short while, and then insert it into the ear's passage.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	 And if the swelling is with water that the patient has drunk easily due to thirst, try to relieve his pressure easily; and be careful not to harm the ear's nerves.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Based on the given text and its similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, I'll provide a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	 If blood flow occurs, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment to restrain the blood flow, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	 Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	 About the care of sty (stye) that appears on the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	 Styes that appear on the eyelids of the eyes are sometimes moist, other times they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	 Therefore, you should have those with tweezers or with your fingers, and carefully cut them with the tip of a knife, and then place something on the spots as described.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	 But if pain with blood flow occurs, then you should cauterize those with a fine pointed cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	 The best way to cauterize is near the incisions, and if they recur too many times, it means that there is still some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	 Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	 Treatment for swelling that appears on the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	 Often there is on the eyelids of the eyes some cause which resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and therefore it is called swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	 And it is an accumulation of thick liquid in the eyelids, both below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	 Therefore, the operation on them is to consider if the growth in them comes from what appears from the eyelid and is increased to every part; and the cause of it is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	 Therefore, make an incision over it with a lancet through the length of it, and then explore it from all around with ease until you empty it, and then suspend it with a hook and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 However, if you are not skilled in the incision, do not attempt to penetrate the eyelid with an incision little by little, for this is of no benefit in any way.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And if the growth is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and care for it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	 And if it is small, then no harm will come to you because of it, for the ointment of it will restore it and heal it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 And if the growth is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should look at its inner surface; then empty the eyelid and suspend the growth with a hook or another incision, and press it from all around; and if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, this is of no benefit in any way.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	 And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with water that contains herbs until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	 Chapter 10
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	 About the treatment of acne on the eyelid above the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	 Acne is a condition that occurs in the layers of the upper eyelid, especially in children, which irritates their eyes and causes cataracts to develop; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears accumulate in them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	 And for this reason you see these children often squinting, even when they sleep; and their eyelids are moist under their eyebrows, which are already swollen with inflammation, and the signs of acne become apparent in the eye; and when you press on that area with your fingers, you feel acne underneath.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	 And another way to perform this operation is for the patient to place their head on your shoulder; and then you place a cloth over them and make a circle around it according to the quantity that contains arteries from all sides, and then you place that over the acne and press with your fingers all around so that the acne is gathered in the middle of the circle. Then make an incision in the middle of that humidity with a sharp scalpel, making the cut as thin as possible, like the one made in phlebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	 "But it is necessary for you to cut the cord completely until you reach the intestines, because in the most serious cases, pus will seep out through a hole, following the appearance of white bile.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	 "Therefore, extract that pus with cloths which you have wrapped between your hands and roll it between your right and left hand until it is expelled.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	 "And make sure not to push into the hole with the spatula, so that you do not reach the intestine and cause damage.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	 "But if you see the intestine at the beginning of the hole, then gently push into the hole with a finger until some pus comes out; and then extract it as we have said; and then submerge cloths in water and vinegar and place them on the area, pressing them firmly.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	 "And also sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the hole to absorb any remaining moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "And then care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	 "But if a boil forms in that place, then treat it with warm compresses until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	 "Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	 Sure, let's break down this sentence:
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	 When pustules are born on the eyelids of the eyes due to the accumulation of foreign particles under natural hair and become old, then these affect the eye and cause various ailments such as persistent tears, softening of the eyelids, and a web-like growth in the eye, which is called a "huel tactinir". The treatment for this condition is carried out in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or with sharp medicine as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization; or it is treated with incision and suturing; or with reeds, as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	 Therefore, it is necessary for you to place the patient's head in your lap; then turn back the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned back, that is good; and if not, insert a needle into that [eyelid] where there is pus beneath the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate upward with thread, and this should be — near the edge of the eyelid where the hair comes out — near the hair, and pull the thread to the upper part with the eyelid, and turn that [eyelid] with a ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	 Then make an incision in the inner part of the eyelid below the accumulated hair with a spatula-shaped lacrimal instrument; and then extract the thread and place small pieces of cotton or cloth under the eyelid, and then sew over the eyelid with a tent, and it should be like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	 This is a complex sentence discussing eyelid surgery or manipulation. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	 And then open with the spatula along the two lines that you have marked, beginning from the larger tear duct and entering into the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	 And if your incision is near the natural hairs, as it is in the case of the king (referring to a specific condition or body part named after a king).
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	 And then place the knife in one of the two angles of the anus, and then excise it entirely, and then join with stitches the two lips with silk or fine wool thread, and cleanse the blood, and make adhere that which overflows from the threads on two eyebrows with some glue-like substance, if you wish to do so; otherwise, do not bother.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	 And then remove the stitches after three or four days, and then cure it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	 And if you wish, leave the wound without stitches and cure it with something that dries and tightens, for the eyelid will be raised due to the healing of the wound and its adhesion; but stitching is better, as the ancients said in their writings.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	 But nevertheless, reassure the patient that it is a good operation and that there is nothing to fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	 And there is another method for treating [this condition], and that is to place [something] on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and then lift the eyelid with three separated and gathered needles according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 But if this is not possible, hold the needles, and if it is not balanced, then take a needle with thread on it and insert it into the middle of the figure. Insert another thread near the larger tear duct, and one near the smaller tear duct, and adjust the threads between these points equally. Then, using these threads, lift your hand with a smooth elevation, lift the entire tendon over which the figure is placed, as we have described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Then adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures and care for it until it heals.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	 But if an abscess appears, make your incision or cut, and then seal the abscess with wax and similar materials, and with ointments.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	 And sometimes it happens to the eyelid that its hairs are affected, then you should use on it what we have said about incision; but a stitch is more artful for each one.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	 It seems like you have provided an incomplete source sentence for translation. Could you please provide the full sentence so I can help you translate it?
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	 Certainly! Here's the translation of the provided text:
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	 And you have already cut the ends of each section where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	 Now add a small amount of this substance to the overflowing part of the eyelid, tightly compress each section with strong pressure, and leave it like this for several days, because the excess caused by the pressure will die and will be reduced until it falls off on its own.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	 But if it is delayed, then break it with the scissors, and then heal the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	 Therefore, once it has healed, the eyelid will be raised and the hairs will not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	 And this is the way to make two threads in the following manner:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	 and let there be neither more nor less of its length and width.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter XII
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	 Of removing painful hairs in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	 When the hairs are not natural, hard, rough and painful to the eyes, then the operation is as follows: you should take a fine needle and place it in that vein of thin silk and linen, and then adjust the ends of it and tie each one in a very subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	 And let the length of the threads be approximately one hand's width.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	 And quickly compose another fine thread underneath him, and if you wish, trim the ends of that one as well.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	 And then place the patient's head in your lap, and let it be close to the sunlight so that your work may be visible, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	 And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs to be removed, and make it penetrate swiftly through the eyelid until you pull it out from above the natural hairline.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	 And then pull the hair out from above and insert it into tweezers, ensuring that the hairs are one, two, or three at most.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	 And then withdraw your hand with it until the hair is removed along with tweezers from the eyelid, leaving only the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	 However, if the tweezers are pulled out and the hair is not removed, pull the tweezers back along with a thread that you have composed with it until it is pulled out from the upper opening.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	 And examine it with the eye, for when you pull out the tweezers and the thread, wipe each one clean and close the eye, leaving the closures in place for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and good flesh grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	 And if it is too short, then you adjust it with a long hair from the natural ones, and you raise it with that, or let it grow until it has lengthened sufficiently, and then you raise it.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	 About the care of cataracts that appear on the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	 When cataracts appear in the eye and there is contraction of the eyelid when it closes on one side or the other due to improper healing of a wound, incision, or cautery, it is called leporine cataract, whether it is natural or accidental. This cataract is caused by the scarring of wounds, incisions, or cauteries, or by their resemblance to those who have been poorly cared for.  (The phrase "lor malcuratz" seems to refer to patients who have not been well-cared for.)
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 The manner of the operation is that you cut through that scar and separate its lips, and place between them a piece of linen cloth, and bind it until it heals.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	 And it is not necessary to use curatives for it from causes that dry or constrain, because if you do this, the cataract will return worse than it ever was before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	 Here is the translation of the first source sentence:
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	 And the treasure of your treatment is that you persevere with all skill, ensuring nothing remains unresolved according to the method stated at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	 And this operation we have mentioned is nothing but a certain rectification of the halyacrax that does not return the form of the place as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	 Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	 About the care of hacrax, which is done in the lower eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	 This halyacrati, which is done in the lower eyelid and is rightly called halyacrati, has two types: some are natural, others accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	 However, an accidental one is caused by a blow, or by a cut, or by a cautery, or by other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	 And the way to perform this operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	 Then gently stretch the skin at those points with the needle and sew it with the needle, and cut off any excess with a broad spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	 And if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, that is good; but if not, take a reed and place it on the divided figure, and with it turn the eyelid, and make two slits in the inner side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	 Sure, let's try to translate the sentence line by line:
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	 And this figure is Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	 Then cut the flesh to the length of the sharp blade below it, which should be the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	 Then adjust the separated parts and suture them with wool thread; then treat them with the ointments mentioned for softening and warm compresses until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	 And if an ulcer is caused by a tear or stitch or a burn, then you should make a flat cut with scissors along the eyelashes of the eyelid as described above.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	 Then separate them with a warm compress between two lips as we said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	 In the summary of the treatment for ulcers when they are above or below, the operation should proceed according to the preparation of the ulcer's shape, and that is in various forms.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	 And the wise craftsman always prepares an instrument in every possible way to return the figure to its natural form or as close as possible, and that patient according to what is convenient for them in the operation and with the best available instruments.
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	 On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	 When this consolidation occurs to many people, so that the eyelid is solidified above the eye with albumen, and it is prevented from the ease of movement and its natural actions, then you must insert the tip of a ray under the eyelid and lift it up with it, or extend it with unguent.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	 Then you should carefully insert a subtle spatula, which is not sharp like the incisions, having a small blunt end so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation; and leave the spatula so that it does not harm the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	 And let your incision be very careful so that it easily detaches that adhesion until the eyelid is returned to its natural shape and all the adhesions are healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	 And then you should put salt water in the eye with which you wash it; or instill in it a solution of hyacinth dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	 And then separate the eyelid from the eye with a piece of linen, and place over the eye wool soaked in egg white, and on the third day use compresses until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter XVI
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	 De la inflamación de una uña y del exceso de carne en las cejas.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	  Sepas que el dolor de una uña puede ser de dos maneras: o bien es nerviosa y similar a un aguijón delgado y duro; o bien no es nerviosa y similar a una humedad blanca congelada. Cuando toca, o se fuerza y se quita con una pinza, o se abre y la pinza no se coloca en ella.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	 Y ambas especies no comienzan sino desde el párpado superior, hasta que poco a poco cubre la vista y prohíbe la luz y el movimiento del ojo.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	 Pero el método para tratar la inflamación es que el paciente coloque su cabeza en tu regazo, y luego abras sus ojos, y levantes el párpado con tu mano, y luego tomes la uña con una pinza de dos puntas y extiéndela hacia las partes superiores.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	 Y luego toma una aguja y coloca en ella un pelo de caballo o de buey o de vaca, o algo similar, o hilo fuerte, o dobla el extremo de la aguja poco a poco y colócala en el medio de la uña, y penetra con la aguja, y ata la uña con un hilo; y extiende aquello hacia las partes superiores, y excava con el pelo el extremo de la uña que es la pupila.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	 And so you should continue with the same method by inserting the needle into his back.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	 And then you should cut the remaining part of the lacrimal duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and clean the natural lacrimal duct to prevent continuous tearing from occurring.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And sometimes the nail with the sole of its onych (nail bed) extended or with pus, as we have said, and then it should be cleaned with a fine spatula, whose shape is this:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	 And be careful not to touch the corneal epithelium with the spatula and cause a tear, or perforate the pupil.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 Then inject into the eye a little of finely ground salt or powder made from ashes, and let it stay there until the next day; then rinse it with water until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	 And if the nail is not painful and you cannot insert the needle, or it is not fixed in that onych (nail bed), then this type of nail should be treated with medicine, and it heals as I have described in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	 And if you wish to incise it, then open the eye of the patient and take a fine spatula with sharp edges like this:
am subtilitat.	 This phrase seems to be missing a verb or context to fully understand its meaning. However, "subtilitat" is likely derived from the Latin "subtilitas," which means "delicacy," "fineness," or "acuteness." Thus, a possible translation could be:
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	 And if you notice that it is rarefied and concealed within it, then apply a mixture made of cinnamon or with chief root or with saltpeter to the wound, and cover the wound until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	 And then continue the operation on it until everything that is from it has been removed, except for any remaining pus in the wound, because if you leave it, and initially cure the pus until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	 And then continue your operation on it with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	 The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the wound due to great harm, should be suspended with a hook; and incise it on one side, but do not finish the incision so that tears do not flow out.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	 And then apply to the lacrimal part a mixture of cinnamon and cinnamon oil until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	 Of the incision of the eyebrow and of what is born of compressed flesh in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	 Sometimes in the wounds of cuts, reddish flesh grows and it is covered until it covers the pupil, or it presses close to the eyelids and tightly closes the eyelids to the sides outside and it resembles the edge of a balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	 Here's the translation of the provided text:
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 Sure, here is my attempt at translating and interpreting the given medieval medical treatise:
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	 Here's the translation of the given text:
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	 Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.
Capitol .xviii.	 "Chapter Eighteen.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	 "From collecting wisdom in the eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	 "Wisdom comes from the veins of the eyes, which are closed over the eye and prevent the vision from working, and it blinds the eyes for many days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	 "Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the eye in which there is wisdom is strong and there is no other illness in it except wisdom, then you collect that wisdom.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	 "And it is that you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with an inch or two, according to your judgment; and let that inch be of subtle doubling, like this:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	 "or two inches gradually in one piece, like this shape:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	 "And then those veins should be collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and you should wipe the blood from time to time until you see that those veins are removed from the eye and are rolled up.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	 "And be careful not to touch the eye with the ends of the spatula; and if your operation is at midday before the sun, and you are steady in your operation so that you do not cut anything but those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	 And when you have completed [the procedure], then you distill into the head chiefly vinegar or rose water, so that with its sharpness it may corrode what has been removed from the liver.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 But if it is not possible to collect everything at once, then you apply a plaster with what gives relief from the pain on him, and leave him for some days until his pain has subsided and he is secure from an abscess forming.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	 And then you repeat the treatment on him in the same manner until he is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	 And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter XIX
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	 On reducing hernias in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	 When you cure hernias with a cautery or sharp medicine according to what has been described previously and it does not heal, then do not incise into it but rather make cuts over the abscess until its maturity is reached, and extract all the moisture that is in it and the pus until the bone is revealed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And when the bone is revealed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of this form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	 And it is called a sharp probe, and it should be made of hard iron, and the tip should be round like this, which should be punctured with very fine holes (as shown in the following figure).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	 Here's the translation of the sentence:
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	 And this is done several times, and then restore the area with drying and astringent substances.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	 Therefore, if the area is healed and good flesh has grown, and the body is separated from the infection, and it remains so for forty days, and it does not reopen or become inflamed, and no accidents occur, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	 And if not, then it is not wise to do anything except reduce the cleft to the shape of the nose, and in this manner: you uncover the bone with a file or sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then take a piece [of skin] in this way:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	 Let the end of the chisel be triangular, and let its handle be first thinned out towards the end as follows:  (This passage describes how to shape a chisel for use in a medical procedure)
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	 And then place that [chisel] on the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal [bone]; and extend your hand a little towards the cheek, and then revolve your hand with the skin until it penetrates all of the bone, and the patient will feel this as something comes out through their hand.  (This passage describes a medical procedure involving the use of a chisel)
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	 Therefore, at that time, the area should be treated with astringent medicines, drying it as you have learned.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	 Therefore, when the flesh and the area are hardened, at that time the matter which has been poured out to the parts outside returns to the nose; therefore, it is easier on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	 Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	 On the Reduction of a Nasal Polyp
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	 When the nose protrudes entirely and no damage or diminution occurs in the vision, it is necessary to let the patient rest, and then follow them. Then you should apply cupping glasses on the neck without scarification and with good suction; and then place a liniment on the nose, which is made of acetra, aloe, lard, and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster on the nose with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	 And the manner of the powders is that you take many linen cloths and each cloth is folded in four layers; and make many of these.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	 Then place them one on top of the other according to the amount that the nose needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	 Then strengthen them with a hard cloth with strong pressure; and repeat the cupping glasses with suction without scarification; then remove the cups and let the nose remain tight for one day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	 "However, if during this time the ligament becomes softened, then it must be made very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	 Then remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	 And if you see that the wound has already been reduced, that is good; but if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and the bandages and the cupping until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	 On the incision of the uveal tract of the eye.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	 When there is a rupture in the uveal tract and it protrudes outward through the eyelids like a grain of raisin, and its appearance is frightening to behold, if you wish to incise it, then the operation on it is as we have described: that you insert the needle into the root of the uvea from below upward, and then insert another needle from the lacrimal part, which has a double thread, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; then incise the place of the double thread and lift with it the protruding part of the uveal tract around the circumference of the needle, and tighten that very much.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	 And then remove the needle and place over the wound linen soaked in egg white, and let it sit until the thread dissolves with the egg white.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 And then treat the wound with water that helps healing until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	 And sometimes add from every part with a circle of cloth into the wound fit a large prominence, and then pierce it with a fine spatula that reaches the depth of the wound, and drain the moisture, and clean the wound and enter immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	 And then strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	 On the treatment of alconati (eye disorders).
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	 This disease called alconati is nothing but water, which is attached to the eye like descending water and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	 But the way to work on it is to have the patient sit on a clean and straight seat, then take their head in both your hands from two sides so that you see the water coming towards the parts below, and then dry it up and do not let it descend, and stop the light, and the patient will see the causes as they are seen.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	 And if it does not move downward, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	 But if the descent is not prepared with the water we mentioned, then have the patient sit between your hands and immediately take a thin spatula and place it over the fat tissue slightly above the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the crown (in the desired location), until the pus is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	 Therefore, once it has been expelled, you should pour warm water over the wound in which you have mixed honey or in which you have previously boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 And it should be treated with the other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter XXII
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	 On the treatment of water coming out of the wound.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	 As we have said before in the division and which one you should use to pierce with a needle, according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	 Then have the patient sit between your hands on a chair and bind their wound tightly with a bandage.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	 And immediately place your left hand near the eyelid of the wound if the wound is on the left side; or with your right hand if it is on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	 And now with your right hand take aloe if the wound is on the left side; or with your left hand if the wound is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	 And then place the tip of aloe near the edge of the wound by the largest tear duct on the side where there is less tearing, and then apply the aloe with care and roll your hand with it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	 And now penetrate into the wound and feel that aloe has reached its intended destination.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	 And it should be that the measure of aloe to the prion is the same as the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and it is the edge of the wound; for you will see with that the pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	 And then place the aloe inside the wound where there is water, and then you draw it down once, and then again another time; and if the water comes out quickly, then you can let the patient see with which eye he recovers his sight first, and the aloe in its wound.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	 And then wait a little while; and if the water has come out, then you remove that other time before the aloe is thrown out.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	 Let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	 "But we and those of our time use an egg white ointment on that wound.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "And if your assistant does not obey you during the treatment of the wound due to its hardness—for there are some men whose skin is very tough—then it is necessary for you to take the plaster which is called albard and which has this form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	 "Therefore, pierce the wound with that, and do not extend your hand into the opening, so as to make a subtle path for your assistant.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	 "And then have your assistant proceed as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	 "And you must complete your work by preparing a decent bed for the patient to sleep on their back in a dark room, and they should be restricted from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	 "And place on his body what is necessary to purify his nature, and do not move his head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	 "And let the bandage be according to its position until the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	 "And then unbind him in that dark room and expose his weakened eyes to the sight of some things, and then reapply the bandage until the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	 And it is not necessary that you do this during the hour of treatment or immediately after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	 It is appropriate that you remove this because water can act slightly more strongly and more intensely due to the cauterization.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	 However, if an abscess forms from the cautery, then it is necessary to open the wound before the seventh day, and treat it with water that can dissolve the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	 Then you should clean the wound and place a cloth over his face, through which you can guide his breathing for several days, keeping him in the darkest place.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	 And then he should be gradually removed from that dark place and returned to normal conditions.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	 And know that in surgery the student is not exempt from seeing certain things, and then you should be brave regarding the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	 And it has come to our attention from some of those who are in the art, and someone said that he made fire in the air with a magnifying glass through which water was drawn.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	 However, I have not seen anyone in our land who has accomplished this, nor have I read about it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	 And these are the forms of the species of magnet for whoever does not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	 And they should be made of iron or steel properly, and their ends should have this delicate triangular shape, with the pointed end like this is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	 ### Chapter XXIV
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	 ### About the treatment of flesh eaten away in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	 When in the nose there are born diverse fleshy growths, one of which has a cause similar to a scorpion's sting or a polypus; and this illness is called polyp because it resembles that fish.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	 And if it is cancerous flesh, pale and of dark color; and if the flesh is like a lion, not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	 Therefore, in that which is among these lions' flesh (non-fraudulent and non-cancerous), it is necessary for the patient to sit between your hands and place in the sun, and have their nostrils washed, and you should prick them with your onyx needle into those fleshy growths. ️
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	 And then remove it from the parts outside, and then cut that which you have grasped with those with a sharp, subtle spatula from one part into another until you know that all the flesh has been removed; because if any cause remains of which the excision is possible, then rinse it with one of the subtle instruments with ease until nothing remains. ️
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	 Certainly! Let's translate the given sentence step by step:
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	 And then place something in the nose close to the incision with vinegar and water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	 But if the nose is open and moisture flows into the mouth, then know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	 But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you should know that there is flesh rotting in the upper bones of the nose, to which the abscess has not yet reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	 Therefore, it is necessary to introduce fat into the wound, which has some thickness, and insert needles into it, and place between each needle the amount of a finger or a half, and tell the patient to swallow one end of the fat into the nose with the finger or with something else that is possible for him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	 And after this is done, let the patient sniff his odor until it reaches the nasal passages, and let it drip into his throat, for many times children at school do something similar to this action, and it is an easy thing to do for someone who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	 Then place the two ends of the fat, one end coming out of the nose and the other remaining in the nose, and then administer a piece of meat with the needles that are in the fat, and do this until you know that the meat is already stuck to the needles of the fat.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	 And then extract the bile, and place near the nostril a cloth for bloodletting, and do this for three days or more until the ointment dissolves all that remains of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	 And then at the end of the procedure, place a lead tube in the nostril for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	 However, if the patient requires drying treatment, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	 And this is the shape of the instrument used for making head-purges with which oils and medicines are administered in the nostrils.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	 And make it of silver or iron, which should be similar to a small open lamp, also like a small basin, and the mouth in the same way.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	 And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and let the tip of the head-purge instrument be flat and open; at the end of which there should be a handle, with which you can hold it when you pour into it oil or water, or whatever substances and suckable causes you want.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	 And these head-purges are precious: take castor bean, white helebore, ginger, and saffron pepper, long pepper, squirting cucumber, ephedra, aniseed, each six drams with juice of wheat and cabbage, and make them into pills. And let one pill be dissolved in tepid water, and let it be poured into the nostrils of the patient who is lying down.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter 25
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	 From the nails in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	 It is often seen that there is a nail in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and mentioned in certain days when most people do not consider it important.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	 And for that reason, you should inquire about its beginning and origin, and understand everything about it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	 Then place a cautery or burning medicine on the area where it was located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	 However, if its appearance is delayed until it becomes large, then consider whether it is hardened, firm, of dark color and with little feeling. If so, do not touch it with iron, for it is a cranky abscess; for many times that person who inquires about this abscess will receive great harm from the one on whom it was located.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	 And if the abscess is soft to the touch and not of dark color, and if it is possible to inquire about it at any time, then evacuate the patient and inquire about it without fear, and treat the area with a drying and constricting agent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter 26
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	 On the suture of the nose and lips and ear when continuity is disrupted by wound or resemblance.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	 You should know that when there is a rupture of continuity in one of these cartilages, it will not affect the operation much except in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Therefore, when something happens to someone due to one of those causes, consider if it is a fresh wound with its blood, and then join the two lips of the wound with stitches, and then care for it until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	 And if the lips of the rupture are already separated and each is healthy, then you should scrape off each divided part of its skin until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And then join the two lips with stitches and strengthen them, and on top of that sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and trisas, and place over the powder a thin plaster of emplastrum diaphoreticum or any other consolidating plaster, and leave it for two or three days, and then remove it and replace the plaster and leave it until the sutures are absorbed by themselves, and then care with ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	 But the method of suturing is that you approximate the rupture with needles in the same way as we have described in the suturing of the abdomen, or approximate the rupture with thread as you have been taught.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	 About removing those causes which come in the two lips of the internal parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	 Some men see in the inner parts of their lips certain hard, fat-like nodules, and some are smaller and others larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	 Therefore you should turn the lips and folds each of those hardnesses in every way, and then you should drain the abscess until it is empty of pus, and then wash it with vinegar, and treat the place with water that has been boiled down, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	 About incision of the attached flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	 Many times people see on the gum a fleshy growth called albulus by the ancients. Then you should suspend it with tweezers or something similar to scissors and incise it along its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	 And then place on the area boiled-down lard or other styptic or astringent powder.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	 And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, because after the cautery it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	 On the reason for toothache with fever.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	 When on the surface of the teeth—both the inner and outer parts, as well as between the gums—rough, sharp, dark scabs appear, sometimes blackish, and become yellow or green before corruption reaches the gum and the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	 Therefore, it is necessary that you rinse the patient’s mouth with your hands and place their head in your lap, then scrape the teeth where those scabs appear until there is no trace left, which will remove the blackness, yellowness, and other discolorations until they are clean.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	 Therefore, if this treatment works and the condition improves as at the beginning of the reason, it is good; but if not, then you repeat the treatment on those teeth for another day and the second and third days until it comes to the final result that you desire.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	 And know that teeth require many different types of scrapers with various shapes according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	 And because the scraper with which the tooth is scraped from the inside is different from the one used between the teeth according to other shapes, and these shapes of scrapers should be prepared as you will see next:
Capitol .xxx.	 It seems like you are referring to the title or numbering of chapters in the medieval medical treatise. In this case, "Capitol .xxx." can be translated as:
D’eradicacio de dentz.	 "D’eradicacio de dentz." translates to "About the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	 "Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu." translates to "It is necessary that you cure the tooth of its pain with all skill and delay in extracting it, for there is no reason that replaces its usefulness when it is extracted, for it is a sublime substance until it is removed from the extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	 "Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies." translates to "However, when the patient insists on having that tooth extracted, you must be firmly certain which is the painful tooth, because often the pain deceives the patient and he thinks it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract it but then the pain does not cease until the sick and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this happen through the work of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	 "Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas." translates to "Therefore, as you must be certain which is the painful tooth and you know it well, then it is necessary that you incise around the tooth with a spatula containing some virtue, until it is dissolved from all parts of the gum, and then remove it with your words, or with subtle forceps little by little until you have removed it.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	 Certainly! Let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	 And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, place it under the patient in such a way that all parts are released with ease and effort, removing it as was done at first.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	 But if the tooth is crooked or corroded, then you should fill that cavity with cloth and tighten it with a thin rope to prevent it from being shattered during your constriction with pliers.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	 And it is necessary that you act very carefully with scarification around all parts of the gum and be mindful of your strength so as not to break it off from the tooth, returning to the patient for the malice that the pain may be greater than before.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	 And beware not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their recklessness and audacity regarding tooth extractions, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they bring great evils upon the sick, which are more difficult than if the teeth were shattered, and all or some of these reasons: that you extract that along with some bones from the jaw as well, just as we have testified many times.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	 And at that point, cleanse the mouth of the patient with wine, or vinegar mixed with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	 And if there is bleeding or many visible blood vessels, then sprinkle some lime on the wound and, if that does not help, use a cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	 The form of the forceps and fine pliers with which the tooth is initially extracted should have a long handle, short shaft, and be thick so that they do not bend when used for this purpose.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	 And the handles should be of such thickness that when squeezed with them they are not bent, and they should have short tips.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	 And they should be made of Indian steel with straight tips, and on the tips of these there should be teeth that fit into each other and hold strongly by constriction, and sometimes the tips of these should be in the shape of a stork's beak, which is curved, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter 31
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	 On the extraction of teeth and removal of broken jawbones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	 When you need to extract a broken tooth that remains in place, it is necessary for you to apply a compress with a border around the area for one or two days until the location becomes softened; and then insert tweezers or pliers, whose tips resemble the beak of a bird called a stork or heron, similar to the shape of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	 "Their extremities should be made from within like a file or sandpaper.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	 "And if you do not comply with this by means of these forceps or tongs, then you must cut through the root and remove all the flesh, and introduce the instrument called atali, which is a small lever, and its shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 "And it should have a small, thick handle, so that it will not be bent.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	 "Therefore, if the root is pierced by this means, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments, whose forms are as follows: The form of the first instrument is a triangular tip with some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	 "The form of the second instrument is that it should have a triangular and more delicate tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	 "And you are helped with this instrument, which has two hooks, whose form is approximately as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	 "And with other instruments which will be used for the scraping of teeth; because this instrument is also made like a large onion, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 "Of the triangular tip that is twisted or short, which should have some thickness, and not be bent so that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	 And you should know that the tools for tooth extraction are similar and resemble other tools.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	 But the skilled and knowledgeable artisans in this art find on their own according to what the operation and various diseases indicate; for there are diseases for which the ancients did not designate or use specific instruments, due to the different forms of various species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	 But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is broken or fractured, then it should be treated with instruments and forceps that are appropriate for the situation, as we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots. Assist him with this gesture, which looks like this:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	 And it should be gradually reduced in size, and held with the mouth so that it does not become inflamed or slip away until the bone is completely reset; and then restore the area with appropriate medicine for this purpose.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then scrape away that fracture and its blackness, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	 Of the care of protruding teeth over others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	 Certainly! Let's translate the text line by line:
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	 And let your incision be made with that which you have used to cut for many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and make sure none of the other teeth are damaged.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if it is an exposed tooth that needs filing, then file it with an Indian steel file of this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	 And let both the file and the margin be made of Indian steel; and let it have small points like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth should be filed little by little over many days gently, so that no other tooth is damaged or falls out.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	 Then draw it to a point at the end, and scrape it with sharp rasps.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	 And if it is a tooth that has been chipped or cracked and it bothers the tongue, then you should file that part so that the roughness of that piece is removed and smoothed out, and filled in so that the tongue does not get cut and speech is not corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	 On restoring decayed teeth with gold or silver fillings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	 When the front teeth are damaged or knocked out by a blow or fall, and the patient cannot chew properly, and you have treated them with astringent medicines, but your treatment has not worked, then in order for them not to fall out, place fillings in those that are strong, using gold rather than silver, because silver turns black and soon crumbles after a few days, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	 And let the fat be in such subtlety and thickness according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the manner of preparing it is that you take the fat and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and then increase with two twists of the fat between two molars, or if one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	 And then gently insert the needle into the area where the problem began, strengthening your hand with care and skill to avoid aggravating the condition.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	 And use the thread which you have used to sew the teeth, so that it does not loosen.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	 And then cut the ends of the excess thread with scissors or forceps, and wrap them around each tooth, hiding them between the healthy tooth and the affected one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	 And then leave it thus tightly bound as a Roman would do.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	 But if it becomes loose or broken, strengthen it or them with another thread in the same manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	 And this is the method for teeth and the technique of aligning two healthy teeth with two affected ones, as you see these bound together.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	 And when one or two teeth are returned to their original position, cast them again in the same way as we have described, and they will improve.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	 And only do this if you are a skilled craftsman and wise.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	 And sometimes it is appropriate to use cow bone for some cause, and it is made in the form of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves with that for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 Capitulum .XXXIV
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	 Of the swelling that appears on the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	 This swelling that appears under the tongue at times is either natural and congenital or accidental and happens due to a healed wound.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	 And the operation on it is as follows: open the mouth of the patient and have their head held up; raise their tongue, and then incise that swollen nerve according to the size until the tongue is freed from its tightness.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	 But if there is any hardness or knot in it, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you should apply oil and cut through it until you have incised the swelling and dissolved the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	 And be careful that a fissure is not made in the flesh, and that you cut only the skin so that there will not be a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	 And then wash the traces of the incision with water or vinegar or cold water; and then place a liniment under the tongue; this is what you should use to hold the patient's tongue down every night, so that it does not become tightened again another time.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	 But if there is a flow of blood, place crushed vitriol on the spot; but if the blood comes out, then cauterize the spot with an old cautery which is appropriate for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 And continue treating with other remedies until it heals.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	 About the removal of a ranula from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	 Sometimes, an abscess resembling a small swelling appears under the tongue, preventing the tongue from functioning naturally; and quickly it grows until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	 And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient sitting in front of the sunlight and observe the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	 And if you see it is dark in color or black, hard, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 And if it turns white, indicating the presence of pus, then you insert a scalpel into it and cut it with a fine spatula, dividing it completely; and if blood comes out during your operation, then place crushed vitriol on it until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 And then return to your work until you have completely removed it, until it has been washed with strong vinegar and salt; and treat it with the other appropriate remedy until it heals.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 It seems like you have provided a chapter or section number rather than a full sentence for translation. Could you please provide the actual text that needs to be translated?
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	 Certainly! Here's the translation of the sentence:
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	 When a lump appears in the throat, it is called glandulas which resemble cotton and appear outside, and they are named two auricles (earlobes). If you treat them with the water we mentioned earlier in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess (apostema) is hard, of dark color, and has little sensation. Then do not touch it with iron (a tool used for lancing).
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	 And if it is of red color and the root (base) is large, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood; rather let it mature inside first, and then either you will lance it, or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	 And if it is of white color, round, and its root is thin, then that is what should be incised (lanced).
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And the operation on it is what you should consider before your operation, whether the apostema has already repaired itself with complete rest or if it has diminished with some reduction; then let the patient sit facing the sun, and his head be in your hand, and open his mouth, and a servant taking between their hands presses the tongue down, using an instrument that is very noble in form.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	 And let it be made of silver or gold, and let it be as thin as a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	 So when you press the tongue with your finger and reveal the abscess, then place your thumb over it. Take a lancet and insert it into the abscess, and draw out the pus to the extent that you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Another thing that may cause pain in the tunic, and then make an incision with this tool:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	 which is similar to forceps, but with curved ends so that the opening of each one faces the other, and very sharp, made of iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	 But if this tool is not available to you, then make an incision with a spatula like this one: and let it be sharp on one end and blunt on the other end.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	 And after you have made one incision, make the other according to the same manner of incision, and then let the patient heal with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 But if there is bleeding, let the patient heal with water from a decoction of pomegranate rind or myrtle leaves, similar to other styptic substances, until the bleeding stops, and then continue the care until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	 Here's the translation for the given sentence:
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	 Based on the context and the similarity to Latin and Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	 And the abscess had already grown so much that it took two months before it burst through two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	 Therefore, I cauterized the fistula and placed it in one of their fingers, pulled it out, and a large portion was removed from them. Then I cut that part where I understood the other opening to be, and then I forced open their mouth, compressed their tongue, and placed the finger in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	 Then I cut out a large part of it, and hardly any blood flowed from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	 Therefore, the woman's condition improved, and she began to drink water and eat food immediately. Since I did not stop cutting from that abscess many times for a long time, another abscess occurred in its place, which I continued to cut until it extended.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	 Therefore, I took courage and cauterized the wound, so that it would heal from there on; and then I walked around and did not know what God had done for me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	 On the cutting of a boil when it becomes suppurative.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	 When they say the boil is suppurative and it is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in a thicker and rounder part, then it is called a carbuncle.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	 Certainly! Let's translate the text step by step:
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	 Certainly! Let's translate the provided sentence step by step:
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	 And it is necessary that you do not insert anything into it except what is naturally fitting without addition, because if you insert more than necessary, you will hinder the natural flow.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 And for the insertion, use what we have recommended for the insertion of two needles, and make sure it is properly secured until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 However, if the patient is frightened by the insertion, you must use cunning in cauterizing him without fear. The manner of the cautery on him is only with hot water, and it is that you place the head of the patient on your lap, and then press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and then take some of the said water from the chapter on cauterization, and make a living wax seal with it. Place it not too thick or thin, and with this fill the cavity of the instrument, which has the following shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	 The end of the cavity in which the medicine is placed should be like the cavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the lip, and have the patient lean back so that saliva or mucus from his mouth will flow due to the internal medicine, preventing any cause from coming out onto his throat and causing him discomfort.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	 And then take your hand with the medicine, and press that on the uvula for about half an hour until you see it become blackened and subdued by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	 And if you want, take cotton and wrap it around the end of the reed. Submerge the cotton in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cotton into a cannula until the cotton adheres to the cannula. Do this as many times as necessary until you achieve the desired effect of cauterizing the uvula. Then leave it alone so that it dries up and falls off in about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	 And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it. Then, after cauterization, clean around the uvula with cotton dipped in warm water, and rinse with that water, which is mixed with the medicine. Wash with cold water, then treat from the outside with a compress, and from within with gargles until it heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	 And this type of treatment is safer than incision and longer lasting.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	 Sometimes the uvula is cured with something thinner than cautery and incision, because it is treated with subfumigation in this way: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, ruta, dried raisins, chamomile, broom and similar herbs, and mix all these ingredients, or some of them, into a pot. Submerge them in strong wine, let it boil; the pot should be well sealed with clay, and there should be a small hole in the middle of the pot, over which a concave iron instrument is placed like this; it can be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	 And the extremity should be placed in the mouth of the patient until the steam reaches the uvula, so that the uvula becomes quite obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	 And then rub the affected area until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of an abscess, as it would cause too much pressure on the abscess, and you should not do this unless you have the consent of the patient's doctor.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	 But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a reed and place on its tip a clove of garlic, so that the patient's mouth may be protected, because the garlic clove prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	 And this treatment is beneficial to health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Chapter .xxxviii
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	 About the removal of thorns and other adhering objects in the throat, and about other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	 Certain marks appear on the throat, or a thorn from a fish bone, or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	 Then you must remove whatever is visible from those marks, and press the tongue forward with an instrument, so that what is in the throat may be revealed to you.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	 And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat must be made to vomit by the patient before the food has descended into the stomach, because strongly connected to the throat are the thorns, which are expelled through vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of soap or lettuce root, or a lump of dry bread; or take a piece of dried marine sponge and soak it strongly in oil, then have the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where the thorns are located, they will be extracted.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	 And take an eel and tie it in oil, and place it inside the mouth, and let it be sucked out with the sucking action; or take a leek and put it into the mouth, and then pull it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	 But if they are not extracted with these causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	 And let it be thicker than a finger, and at the end of it let there be a concavity which you insert into his throat easily.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	 And let him raise his head upwards, and be careful that the touch of his throat bone does not cause harm or injury to him, or that it pierces a bone or spine, or that the physician with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Capitol .xxxix.	 Chapter 39
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	 Of the removal of a leech attached to the gullet.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	 When the leech is treated with water as mentioned in the division of care with medicines and not iron tools, consider then in the gullet of the patient on the tongue, after you have compressed the tongue with an instrument that we have recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	 Therefore, if you see the leech, extract it with a small hook or a fine, delicate instrument.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	 And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a concave tube and insert it into the gullet of the patient, and place a heated iron in the concavity of the tube, and do this until (the leech is dead and comes out of the gullet) and let the patient abstain from water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	 Then take a vessel full of cold water and open the patient's mouth in it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not swallow any of that water, but spit it out after an hour or so, because the leech as soon as it feels the water runs away.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	 "However, if it is not forgotten with the aforementioned substance, then fumigate the patient with mace or asafoetida through the instrument we have mentioned for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	 "Do this, and you will have success in whatever you attempt.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	 "And there is another way of performing this fumigation: take a bowl with burning coals inside it, and cover the bowl with a lid that has a hole in the middle; place the end of the instrument through this hole. Then begin the fumigation; have the patient put their mouth on the end of the canula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not lost until you know that it has reached the blood vessel, because the blood vessel will quickly fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	 "And if it does not catch [the blood vessel], then you must repeat the fumigation many times, and prevent the patient from drinking; let them eat salty and dry foods, and do not give them water, and with this treatment the condition will be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	 "And this is the shape of the instrument with which bloodletting of the goiter is performed when it is visible; and it resembles forceps as you see, except that there are some curves in it:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	 Sure, I'll do my best to translate the sentence into English:
Capitol .xl.	 "Chapter Forty
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	 "In which is the summary of the discussion on abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	 "Abscesses are various species of various kinds, according to the memory of them, each discussed in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	 "And they are diverse in their incision and treatment through two methods, one of which is according to the type of abscess itself, and the other according to what we understand about the fluids.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	 "And the second method is according to the parts of the body in which they occur, for an abscess occurring in the head is different from one occurring in the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy area is different from one occurring in a joint; and each has its own treatment according to the location.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	 "And there are some abscesses which must not be incised except when the pus has matured or reached its peak.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	 "There are other abscesses which should be incised when they are fresh and not yet matured to their fullest extent, such as those occurring near joints; for an abscess near a joint has its existence prolonged until it can spread to the surrounding area, and easily the ligaments or nerves of that joint become corrupted, causing contraction of that limb. Or it is an abscess near a main limb, and if you delay incising it until it becomes mature in the main limb; or it is near the buttocks, then incise it even if not yet matured, but do not incise it while fresh and undigested except for those near the buttocks, to prevent its pus from spreading within the buttocks and causing a fistula, or so that it does not heal in its place.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	 It seems that the text is written in a language with strong Romance influence, likely some form of medieval Latin or a related Romance language. Here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	 And know that it is mature when there is the abatement of pain and the ceasing of fever, and also the reduction of redness and pulse, and the sharpening of the head of the boil, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	 And be aware that the perforation should occur below the boil and from where the pus comes out, in order to achieve a cure from the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	 And the perforation should always be along the length of the flesh or body, if the boils are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the areas of the wrists, cords of nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places except those that reflect, for in those that do reflect, use perforation according to that limb.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	 But when the boil is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave its perforation open until its digestion has been confirmed by time, as we have said; because if you perforate it before that, the body of the pus and much filth are prolonged, and the edges of the boil become hardened and deep.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	 However, some boils are perforated according to the thickness of the flesh or body, as necessity requires, or according to what the limb needs.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	 And it is necessary that you administer a small puncture, and in large abscesses, a large and wide puncture or several incisions according to the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	 And there are other abscesses in which it is necessary that the blade be concave and cut, when done this way, it is done so that it does not hurt, as with those that occur in cases of double boil or buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	 And there are those that are incised with a triangular section; and of these is one which is incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf, such as the abscesses of the buttocks.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	 And there are those in which a round section or lunar section is administered, and similar to these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	 But in the case of superficial abscesses such as lion's teeth, it is necessary that you puncture them with a superficial or flat puncture only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	 And it is necessary that when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you puncture it and do not worry about extracting all of the pus at once; having extracted part of it, and then close the abscess again for another day, and then extract a larger portion, and then do this many times according to degree until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	 And especially if the patient is a child, or a pregnant woman, or an elderly person in poor health, because the vital spirit often leaves with the discharge of the blood, and the patient dies quickly, and you open the veins.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	 And take great care with this chapter, and when making the perforation in which you make these incisions, it is necessary that you cleanse the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or a flat section; then you should administer oil of lilies or ancient cotton; and if the abscess is large and the openings of the perforation are many, then you must place cotton in each opening until they come out together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if in the abscess a piece of intestine has been cut or is concave within it, then you must fill it with old cotton or a thread made from linen cloth, just as when you have pulled out bread or roots, without moisture; and strengthen that until the third day; and then proceed to process and cure it with water suitable for ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	 But if there is bleeding during your operation, then you should administer cold water and vinegar, in which you soak a linen cloth, and place it on the area of the bleeding many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	 But if the flow of blood persists, then it is necessary for you to administer remedies and treatments, as well as the powders that have been recommended in many places in this book of ours, under the division (or heading) [specific topic].
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	 But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then it is necessary for you to soak powders in wine and hot oil, and place them on the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 And if it is in summer, and the affected areas are fleshy, then it is necessary for you to apply powders soaked in water or oil (or wine and oil), and do this until the third day, as we have said, and then it is necessary for you to open the abscess, cleanse it, and administer a treatment that is appropriate for the patient until they are healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	 And this is what is necessary to know about the treatment of abscesses in general. But as I have already said, according to the method of distinction, each type of abscess should be treated differently, as discussed specifically under individual headings.
Capitol .xli.	 Chapter .41
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	 About the incision of abscesses that occur in the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	 In the nape of the neck, there are small abscesses, and these are species of nodes that contain tunics; the species of these are moving.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	 And they have pustules, from which comes moisture similar to pus.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	 And these contain moisture similar to dust, and resembling them; and from these come the hard stones.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	 And in the cutting of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, because their extraction does not cause a reaction.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	 And the operation in cutting these is that you should touch them with an instrument of which the form approaches as follows: called entromes, so that it may contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	 Because if what is contained is moisture, then cut it along its length with a superficial section in this manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	 And begin the incision from the line of .B. to the line of .G. Therefore, when the moisture has been evacuated, then you should scrape away that which contains the moisture, and leave nothing of it at all, because if there remains any cause, too often does it return.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	 And then submerge the area in Egyptian ointment if available, and if not, in water and salt; fill it with this mixture and let it sit until the next day, because with water you dissolve all that is underneath that skin layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	 And then apply the Egyptian ointment repeatedly and thoroughly to that area if needed, until you are confident that there is no longer any cause underneath that skin layer; then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	 And if the abscess has fatty knots, then you should cut it according to this method:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	 with a cut in the shape of a cross, and make an incision between the two lips of the cut, and draw it out from all sides, and strive to remove the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	 But if your archery faces resistance, then do as I first told you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	 Similarly, perform the incision and treatment on the stone-like abscess as we have told you; the incision on a stone-like abscess is lighter because it contains little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	 And sometimes there are abscesses of this type that are in the head of some people with whom there is no moisture; the reason for this is that I once made an incision on an abscess in the head of an old woman and found the abscess to be like a deaf, rough, white stone that could not be broken, and if anyone struck it with that, they would hurt themselves.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	 Sure, here is the translation of the given sentence:
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	 And close the puncture from those on the lower part of them, so that the body may be relieved from sickness in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	 Then treat them with water that is suitable for healing.
Capitol .xlii.	 Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	 On the incision of scrofula that occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	 Often these tumors appear in the neck and armpits and groin area, and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And those that occur in the neck are similar to many others, and all of these tumors develop inside their own capsule, just as we have described for nodes and tumors of the head.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	 There are many types of these tumors, for some are hard and stony, others contain moisture, and still others are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	 Therefore, if you see that the one you are examining is well-positioned for treatment, and its color resembles that of codena, and it is mobile in all directions, and it is not attached to the nerves of the neck, or the veins, or the arteries, and it is not fixed in place, then you should incise it with a superficial cut from above downwards on the body, between the line of G and the line of B, and remove it completely, and extend the lips of the codena with one or more oncis as needed, just as we have said for tumors of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	 And it is more cautionary that neither the vein nor nerve be severed.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	 And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not cut into your hand during incision, or disturb the patient, and do not cut anything that is not necessary to cut; because if you were to cut a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from operating, then apply to the wound trissated vitriol or other powders that stop blood flow, and bandage the wound, and allow that which reduces the acuity of the inflammation and softens the wound and begins to putrefy.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	 When the blood is released.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	 Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	 And then inquire with the patient's tongue if there is any reason for the other small scrofulas; therefore cut and clean those as well.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	 And if there is a large vein near the scrofula, it is advisable not to cut that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	 Beforehand, it is better to bind it tightly with a strong bandage and leave it until it falls off by itself without harming the patient.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	 And then fill the wound with cotton wool that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	 And if you cut out the entire scirrhus (a hard lump formed by disease), then you should sew together the two lips of the wound and suture it immediately, so that there is no remaining surplus.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	 But if you see that there is still excess due to the size of the scirrhus, it is necessary for you to understand how to cut off the root of it, and then draw it out and administer a suture as mentioned before.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And for those scirruses which contain moisture, you should puncture them with a superficial puncture at the place where they appear to be most mature, and make the puncture in such a way that the pus comes out from below the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	 And then administer a puncture, using needles and similar ointments, so that it corrodes whatever remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	 And then, when you see that the wound has been cleansed, at that time you should cure it with flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	 Chapter 43
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	 "When the pus of an abscess is drained from within the mouth.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	 "The ancients said that this incision should be made in the tonsils, and we have not seen anyone in our land who has done so.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	 "And here is the transcription of their discourse.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	 "However, in men with phlegm, the removal of the tonsils should be avoided because it can cause harm due to the fact that all the main veins of the patient are located there.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	 "However, in those who have abscesses caught in the mouth, throat, or ears, when the illness is not in the throat, it is advisable to use the incision of the tonsils to avoid the loss that occurs from suffocation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	 "Therefore, when we want to do this, we should cut the tonsils below three or four small circles of the tonsil's circles, through the thickness between two circles, so that the incision is in the cartilage, not in the cartridge. And this place is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and its blood vessels are close to the surface.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	 "And if the doctor is timid, he should then extend the neck with his thumb, and immediately cut through the neck until it reaches the channel, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any of them.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	 And then you should incise the lip according to what we have recommended; and it is indicated on the section of the canal for the inflammation which is of that issue with water that is from him disrupted and by the absence of voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	 And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	 Therefore, when the hour has passed in which perforation is feared, bring together the two lips of the wound and sew it up with only that thread, without the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	 And then administer medications that promote the growth of flesh until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	 And Al-Zahrawi says that the summary of this advice which we have given is nothing other than to see that some of these apostemas have already taken the throat of the patient and the patient has come close to death, and his soul has dried up, and some people go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the wound for some breathing, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 And for this reason he ordered the wound to be left open until the evil of the illness is consumed; and its evil lasts for three days; and therefore then he commanded that the wound be sewn up, and cared for it until it was healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	 And what I have seen myself is that a servant took a knife and cut her throat with it, severing a part of the lung, and I was called to care for her. When I arrived, I found her as if she were dying, uncovered the wound, and found the blood which was flowing from the wound slowly.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	 Therefore, I concluded that she had not cut a vein or artery, and the wind was coming out of the wound, so I treated her until she healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	 And the servant did not speak hoarsely or in a weak voice, and after a few days she recovered her usual strength.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	 And now I say that in the section of the epileptic [patient] there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	 Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	 On incision of an abscess that occurs in the neck outside, which is called a neck hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	 This abscess named neck hernia is quite large according to the complexion of the body, and it is very common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	 And it occurs in two ways: either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	 And in the natural case, there is no need to cure [it].
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	 And the accidental (condition) is of two kinds: one resembles large knots, and the other resembles an abscess caused by the obstruction of an artery, which is feared.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	 And it should not be presumed (to treat) in him with iron, except in the case that it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And you should pursue that and investigate it with the said (method), and if you find it resembling large knots, and it is not connected to any of the veins, then you should incise it just like the knots, and extract it with water that contains the peel of pear and burdock; but if not, then explore its entire being, and subsequently cure the area with water suitable for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	 Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	 On the cutting of the different types of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	 There are many types of knots, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division (section).
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	 And it is fitting that I also explain the difference between a knot and an excrescence, so as to avoid confusion.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	 Therefore, I say that with an excrescence there is heat and fever and intense pain until the boiling of the excess fluid subsides; and it is a complete putrefaction, which then ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	 "However, if there is no heat, fever, or pain, then consider that condition to be the proper one for the lion's cub.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	 "And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cheese, made in this way: whether it is larger or smaller, they are of two types, because they can be fat and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I have said before in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 "Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of this condition, examine it and inquire about its beginning with an instrument called an introme, as will be explained in the following chapter.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	 "And this is the manner of inquiry for all apostemas and nodes: you must take this instrument and insert it into the moistest part of the apostema, and then slowly revolve the said instrument until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the cord.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	 "Then press with your hand according to the size of the apostema, and then remove the instrument and observe what has exited in its wake.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	 "And if the liquid is watery and of any color, then you should incise it with a shallow cut, as I have said for other apostemas.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	 And if there is no moisture from the trace of the entrance, then know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	 And dry on him I dry with the form of a cross according to this shape:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	 As you have been taught, and suspend that one hanging down, and peel the cord from all around with ease, and keep the skin or sack, if possible, on top of it, and draw out that corruption with the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	 But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that corruption, and many times it happens this way, and then you extract it by force until nothing remains of it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	 Because if any part of it remains, little or much, the knot returns according to the most.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And if you see that any small part remains, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders and bind the wound, and place on it a cautery to prevent an abscess from forming, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	 And if the knot is large, then you sew up both lips of it and treat it with a remedy that promotes healing.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	 But if there is an artery or a vein opposite it, then you cauterize and fill the place with powdered vitriol, leaving that narrow for two days or three until the wound softens and the boiling of the blood subsides; and then return to divide what remains of the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	 Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	 About the forms of the necessary instruments in sectioning and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	 The shapes of these instruments are of three types: large, medium, and small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	 The form of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	 The form of the medium-sized instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	 The form of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	 They are made of iron, with sharp tips, so that the instrument fits well into the incisions.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	 And these are the forms of the instruments, which are called albera, and one of them is called bistoury.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	 And they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	 The form of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	 The form of the medium-sized instrument is this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	 The form of the small instrument is this:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	 Therefore, they should be used for incisions, openings, fistulas and abscesses, especially when there are bones or other causes involved.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	 And they are made round, thick, long, like large needles with which sails are sewn together, and they are made of bronze or iron or silver, and the best ones are when they are made of bronze.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	 And the experiments of black plumage are performed, which align with the opening of the fistulas in the cavities where the reflections reside, so that they may be reflected back with their lightness by those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	 And [choose] from three types, for some of them are long, others medium, and others short, according to the width of the fistula and its stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	 Form of the great lead experiment:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	 Form of the medium lead experiment:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	 Form of the small lead experiment:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	 The forms of the needles are of many types, for some of them are simple, which have only one curvature, and they are of three types: large, small, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	 And there are curved needles, and they are of three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 And among those are curved needles with two curvatures, and they come in three sizes.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 And there are also those which have three curvatures, and they come in three sizes.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	 And all of these are necessary in their respective places.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	 Shape of a large simple needle, its shape:
Forma de unci simple migier:	 Shape of a medium-sized simple needle:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	 Shape of a small simple needle, its shape:
Forma de unci orp gran:	 The phrase "Forma de unci orp gran" can be translated into English as follows:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	 Based on the context provided and the similarities with medieval medical treatises in Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	 Based on the context and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a possible translation of the sentence:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	 **Form for a large ointment with two curved edges:**
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	 **Form of a medium-sized ointment with two curves:**
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	 **Form for a small ointment with two curved edges:**
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	 **Form of a large ointment with three curves:**
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	 **Form for a medium-sized ointment with three curves:**
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	 **Form of a small ointment with three curves:**
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	 **And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodes and apostemes are cut and scraped, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small.**
Forma de scapel gran:	 **Form of a large scalpel:**
Forma del scapel migier:	 **Form of the medium-sized scalpel:**
Forma de scapel pauc:	 **Form of the small scalpel:**
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	 **The tips of these scalpels with which sections are made are sharp, and the other tips are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a way that it is done for fear of cutting a vein or nerve while scraping the nodes, and thus the patient may find some relief from the heat caused by the scraping of the apostema.**
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	 **And these are the forms of almagidas, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, as you will see.**
La forma de magda gran:	 The form of great sorrow:
Forma de magda migier:	 The shape or form of great distress:
Forma de magda pauc:	 The form of small distress or worry:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	 They are made of iron and have the appearance of a king, with which they make an alchemist's furnace.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	 And it is in the left side that is pricked with a needle, hidden by a bandage, and from there it goes to the parts inside and outside, when you want, as often as you wish.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	 The shapes of needles, which are hidden between the fingers for the piercing of boils, and the patients do not feel them, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	 And these are the forms of those (needles):
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	 The shapes of cupping glasses with which the flow of blood is removed, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small; their forms are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	 They are made of thin iron, round with some length, and they are delicate.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	 And you must have these sizes of cupping glasses for your large, medium and small ones, so that through them you can quickly cut off the flow of blood in case of necessity, and then it will not be the first medicine for you.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	 "However, do not use it to absorb blood in all parts of the body, and use it only on fleshy places, such as on the thighs and hips, and on the arms, breasts, stomach, and ankles, similar to their fleshy flesh.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	 "At other times these instruments are made smaller, similar to the heads of needles, following this form; through which blood is absorbed when it is done by phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	 "And at other times they are made round, following this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	 "Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	 "On the care of men's breasts that resemble women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	 "Sometimes the breasts of certain men swell due to lack of sleep when they begin to become flabby, and then the breasts also swell and resemble women's breasts, becoming firm and hairy.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "And for those who suffer from this, it is necessary to incise that area with a lunar section as follows: from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then remove all the fatness, and then fill the wound with red medicinal ointment, and then close the two lips of the wound with stitches, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Based on the pattern you've established, here is my best attempt to translate the provided sentence:
Capitol .xlviii.	 Capitolo XLVIII (Chapter 48)
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	 About the perforation of abscesses that come from tickling (itching).
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	 These abscesses that come from itching are of the species of scrofula, hard, which contain a bag full of pus.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	 And of these, some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when everything that is in the abscess from the pus has been evacuated, then fill it with old cotton wool and leave it alone until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	 And then remove the cotton and treat [the area] with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	 And if the abscess is of the species of swellings or scrofula, then you should cut it open in the same way as we said in the section on scrofula.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	 But if the wound is so extensive that gangrene may occur, then administer cautery on it as we said earlier.
Capitol .xlix.	 Capitolo XLIX (Chapter 49)
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	 About the section of abscesses that occur due to archery or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	 When an artery is ruptured and the cord which lies on top of it becomes solidified, then serious boils occur, known as inflammation and abscess. For the signs by which inflammation and abscess are recognized to be either from an artery or a vein: because when the abscess is from an artery, it extends lengthwise along the body; and if you press on the abscess with these words, you feel in it a certain whistling sound.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	 And that which is from a vein appears as a round swelling on the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	 And incision on this abscess is a mistake, especially in those below the armpits, in the groin, in the neck, and in many other parts of the body; and it is very dangerous, so its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is at the extremities or on the head must be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	 However, on those caused by the inflammation of the opening of an artery, make a section in the cord along its length; and then widen the section with hooks near the artery, until you have freed it from the tunic so that it is laid bare.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	 And then place on it a needle and make it penetrate to the other side, and ligate the artery with double thread in two places — which I have used for you in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	 And then puncture the area that is between two ligaments with a lancet until all the blood in it has come out and the abscess has been dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 And then administer treatment to the area where pus has formed until the ligaments fall; and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	 And if it is an abscess caused by the drying of a vein, then you must have water within your reach that is as close as possible to the abscess with a cord, and then insert the needle under the area where you had your hand, and make it penetrate; and let there be a double thread in it until you extract that from the other side, and then bind the abscess with a good ligature as I have told you in the ligature of the grape with two parts and two ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	 But if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert a needle with wax under all of the abscess until the first incision of the needle, and strengthen your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	 Then dry the abscess in its middle part until when what is inside it has come out, then you incise the superfluity of the cord and let what is connected to it go.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then place on the wound the cloth which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment which is made with clay and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	 Chapter One of the abscess that occurs due to a twist of the nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	 Thus, an abscess can occur in the arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess can occur in the nerves when there is a blow to them or excessive labor, and by similar means.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	 And it most commonly occurs in the areas of the ankles or soles, or in any place where the joints are weakened.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	 And it is a serious abscess, and its color resembles that of other parts of the body, and in its most severe condition without fever, when it is very narrow, the patient feels something like a stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	 And it is not an abscess that accumulates in the front of the body, and therefore the neck is left out, as it is located in all other parts but does not move forward or backward.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	 Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be filled with iron, because it will easily become contracted.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	 But that which is on the head or forehead should be cauterized without a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	 "But if it is an abscess, then take that with the scissors and incise it carefully.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "And if it is large, then suspend that with hooks, and scrape that away, and immediately remove that; and close the wound with stitches, and treat that until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	 "Chapter II.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	 "About the incision of an abscess which occurs in the chest, which also occurs in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	 "It is advisable to cut many abscesses found in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal because they resemble mushrooms, from which the root is fine and the head is large; and already their lips have turned black, and it is one of those that is small, and it is one of those that is very significant.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	 "And I have seen one, and in his belly there were two of these things which were more like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those and the whites, of small root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	 "And already their lips had turned black and split open, and moisture ran from it constantly.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	 "Therefore I incised those and found in one a scorpion with eighteen stings, and in the other a scorpion with six stings.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	 And the operation in their incision is that you consider whether the patient is moist, and the color of the swelling is white, moist, of subtle nature; then you incise them with a wide spatula, and let there be in your presence cauteries in the fire, because often you must expel much blood from it; and if blood comes out, cauterize that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	 And if you see the patient is weak and fearful, beware of incising with iron; but rather take freshly made lead plaster, and strengthen that swelling with it, in the manner we have described; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	 And then tighten the lead wire in the constriction; then do not cease to strengthen the lead greatly on it, until it is cut and falls off by itself without effort.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	 But if it is of great size, then there is some cause for fear and dread in its incision, and especially in those that are in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	 But it is possible that you can incise most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	 And then care for it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	 And be careful that you do not dare to cut off any of them which are dark in color, with little feeling, and great regard, for those are like cancerous growths.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	 And I will come to mind with the memory of crab nearby as well.
Capitol .lii.	 Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	 Of the treatment for inflammation of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	 Inflammation of the navel is caused by several factors: either by fissures in the cipher which is on the belly, and from it comes out the intestine or hernia as happens with other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or artery as previously stated, or by trapped gas within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	 But if it is due to a fissure in the cipher and protrusion of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the body; and it is soft without pain, and appears in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	 And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its condition with what we have mentioned above is of greater diversity and intensity, and when you press on that area as described, it becomes hidden and returns; and it is very light with it, and the entrance of the bath and intense labor are greatly increased.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	 Based on the pattern and the context of the previous translations, let's attempt to translate this line by line:
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	 And if it is due to blood, then with these signs you should identify the abscess by its darkening color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	 But if it is due to flesh, then it is a serious, large and hard abscess, and it is fixed according to its quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	 But if it is due to gas, then touching it will be painful.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	 And the operation on it is that you should consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or vein, or gas; then you must be prohibited from treating it, for in this there is fear and dread, as has been taught to you in the chapter where I have said about abscesses due to arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	 And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or hernia, then you should command the patient to hold their legs together and lie extended; and then feel with your hand all around the navel, and then order them to turn between your hands on their back, and then circumscribe with a wide spatula all around the navel over the place that you have felt with your hand; and then extend most of the abscess above with a large hook; and then bind it around with a strong ligature or with silk in the proper manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	 And then carefully extend the pus of the abscess on the bandage and insert your finger into that incision; and if you have found and secured it with the bandage, then extract it quickly and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	 And if you have found the hernia, then take it with a hook; and cut off its excess parts.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	 But if it is contrary to your archery or vein, then circle that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and insert into them two strong threads, and insert two needles into the circle you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, causing them to penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if you wish, remove the needles and let the place remain open until the spread flesh can fall off by itself; or cut that part when it is thinned out and has fallen off, and then heal it with water from the appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	 And if the protrusion of the navel is due to flesh or fluid in it, then you should draw out the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or fluid that you find in it, and then heal it with water that promotes healing and strengthens the area.
Capitol .liii.	 Sure, I'll translate the text line by line into English. Please provide the next part of the text after "Capitol .liii.
De curacio de cranc.	 Chapter 53. About the treatment of crabs (lice).
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	 We have said in the division about the species of crabs (lice) and how to treat them with medicines, and that it is necessary to use iron in the treatment so that it does not become ulcerated; we have also mentioned crabs born from mothers and the caution needed for their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	 And the ancients said that sometimes crabs (lice) are in places where their eradication is possible, such as on the head or in the armpits and similarly in other parts of the body, and it is best to remove them all, especially when they are just starting out small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	 But when they are old and large, it is not wise to approach them, for I have never seen anyone cured of that, nor have I seen or heard of any other who has reached such a state.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	 And the treatment for them is as follows: you should first purge the patient and administer black hellebore several times, and then bleed them if there is a clear indication of congestion.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	 Then prepare the patient with the appropriate preparation for the operation, and then proceed with the incision that is required; then scrape thoroughly from all sides with a good-quality spoon until no cause of its return remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	 And let the blood flow, and do not stop it abruptly, but apply pressure to the area and cleanse the thick blood completely with your hand or with an instrument suitable for this purpose from among those available to you.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 But if you encounter an obstruction of thick blood in the vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood ceases, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	 Chapter forty-seven.
De curacio de ydropici.	 On the Treatment of Diabetics.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	 We have already mentioned in the classification the types of diabetes due to water and the signs of each type, as well as their treatment with medications.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	 And that which is cured with iron is only the type of diabetes called althea, and it should not be treated with iron if it is the type known as tympanites or hypoglycemia, for this is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	 And when you have treated this type of diabetic known as tympanites with medicines and your treatment has not been successful, then consider that if the patient has already become debilitated, or suffers from another type of diabetes, such as coughing or abdominal pain similar to these, then be cautious not to treat him with iron, for there is cause for concern about this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	 Certainly! Here is the translation of the given text into English:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	 The translation of the sentence into English is:
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	 And then consider if the origin of dropsy is from the intestines, because in that case you should perform an incision near the navel for three times the length of the fingers, on the right side of the patient, over the pubic bone.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	 But if the cause of dropsy is a liver disorder, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel for three times the length of the fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	 And if the cause is from the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	 And it is not necessary that your incision be on the side where the patient wants it to be, so that the superfluities do not flow to that place quickly.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	 And then perforate with the instrument all the way through the intestine, and then introduce it into that incision, and raise your hand with the spatula between the intestine and the bladder, and you will scrape it out; if the amount is of a fingernail or close to it.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	 And then pierce the bladder until the spatula reaches the empty place, which is where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And then extract that and introduce an instrument of this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	 and it is similar to a fine silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or bronze, at the end of which is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the tip of it is sharpened like a pen, as you see:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	 And on the topmost part of him is an armor, because when the instrument reaches the water, they immediately remove it from the instrument, thus evacuating a large quantity of water in that moment. For if you evacuate more than necessary at that time, it can cause the patient to die suddenly due to the loss of their vital spirit, or it can lead to quintan fever, which indicates an imminent death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	 But evacuate only as much as the strength of the patient allows, according to what the disposition of the patient indicates regarding the strength of their pulse and their overall well-being.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	 Then remove the instrument, and draw out the water that causes it, because as soon as it is drawn up by the cord that holds the pipe which is placed on the top of the container, I advise you to pierce it in this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	 Then repeat the procedure with the instrument on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and draw out a small quantity of water each time. Do this for several days, being cautious to ensure that only a little water remains.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	 But if you fear for the patient and leave a large quantity of water, then treat it with a poultice of hot sand, and move him to a bath, and expose him to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until he is cured.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	 And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen near the area of water removal, as I have described earlier in this text.
Capitol .lv.	 Chapter 50.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	 Concerning the treatment of infants whose urethral openings are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	 Sometimes, one of the infants is born from his mother's womb with an unperforated head of the penis (or it is narrowly perforated and not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	 Therefore, it is necessary to cut with a needle as soon as he is born, using a very fine instrument in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	 And then place a thin lead pin through the opening and tie it there, and keep it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	 When he wants to urinate, remove it and let him urinate; then replace it afterwards.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	 And if you do not place the lead there, it is possible that the urine which comes to that place will not find an opening.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	 But the one with a narrow opening should be treated with a lead pin as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	 But those in which the opening is not in its proper place are called hypospadias, and the cause of this is that the one who was born with the opening at the end of the penis cannot urinate straight ahead, but must lift his penis upwards; and it is not a good thing for him, because the semen cannot reach the mother as it should be, and this is a very bad condition. etti
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	 Based on the provided text and context, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	 And be careful in your operation of blood flow, for many times this happens; and stop the bleeding with something that can cauterize the wound, and care for the wound until it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	 Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	 Of the whitening that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of darkening, blackening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	 This whitening occurs frequently in the penis and is prominent in the loose skin.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	 And of these, one is malignant and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	 Not malignant, which means you should suspend it with fine linen and cut it until it is all removed; then place a cotton swab soaked in Egyptian ointment on it; and then treat it with diaphanic ointment until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	 And if the whitening is malignant, of black color, then you should apply cautery near its origin and cause.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	 However, if the whitening is in the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the whitening is inside the foreskin and the other part outside, then you should remove the whitening that is inside at the beginning until it is solid; and then you treat what is outside, because when you treat both the foreskin and the penis together, it is not certain that it will not recur.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	 And then care for him with the other treatment until he is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	 But if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	 because the healing cautery is effective against two conditions at once, which are the flow of blood and the wound when it becomes corrupt.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	 And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed in that moment, then you must insert a lead tube into the opening of the foreskin, so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	 In the case of adhesion between the foreskin and the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those whose foreskin is healthy, and on whom circumcision is not performed; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or an abscess), it is necessary that you should separate with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.  (This passage seems to be referring to phimosis, a condition where the foreskin cannot be retracted over the glans, often due to scarring or inflammation.)
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	 And if it is difficult to separate them precisely, then you should separate with a spatula some of the skin from the head of the penis and the foreskin. And this is because the foreskin, being thin, is easily pierced by its own thinness slightly.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	 Based on the provided context and the similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	 And then it should be treated with six styptic applications until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	 Chapter .57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	 Of the cleansing of infants and the care of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	 Circumcision is not a cure for lust like other diseases; however, since it is of our operation and will, and especially in children, it is necessary to assign the best operation and the easiest way to preserve health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	 Therefore, I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws. The only reason is that we have acquired it by experience, which is why I have found most artisans and barbers to practice circumcision and cleansing with a razor and cloths; and they use bandaging with thread and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	 And I have tried all these methods and did not find better cleansing with scissors, with bandaging with thread that in cleansing with the nail, because many times it escapes the cord above, because the cord of the foreskin has two tunics, and the lower tunic remains, and easily a new incision and pain is ensured.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	 And with cleansing, which is done with alphacati, and is digital, which shoemakers use, the insertion of the end of the male member is not secured, because it easily enters into its hole.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	 But in the operation with a nail, be careful and avoid iron and do not let your operation be spoiled.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	 And the baby's umbilical cord is short by nature, and it is often seen that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	 But the cleansing that is done with scissors and bandages with thread, its goodness, practical experience has revealed to me, because the scissors have proportional insertion, for this reason as the sharpness above is so also the sharpness below; and therefore as you press your hand in a proportionate manner between the two sharp edges, and you cut according to a comparison in one time; and there is made a compression of the thread with the figure containing the penis cord from all sides, with which nothing goes wrong. ⟩⟩
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	 And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie down as much as possible if he is one of those who understands a little, that you only tie the thread in his penis so that you leave him until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	 And then make that person happy in every way possible so that they can regain their consciousness.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	 Then have that person sit between your hands and prepare themselves, without being upset; and hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see them or any other of the tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	 Then insert your hand into the patient's anus and blow air into it, and pull out until the head of the penis is visible, then clean that area of any filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	 Then tie the marked area with double thread, and then tie another knot a bit lower on the second layer of thread, then take hold of the ends of the thread and secure the area of the knots underneath with good tension, and sew between the two layers of thread.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Then gently lift the anus and pull out the head of the penis; then allow the blood to flow slowly, as this is better; and sprinkle powder on it, and place a cloth over the powder, which has been soaked in oil infused with fresh garlic; leave that there until the next day; and treat it with treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	 The shape of the forceps for modification, this is how it should be done:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	 The nails should be straight and not pointed, while the other ends should be sharp. The length of the two points should match the length of two equal-sized handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	 However, the mistake in modification is when you completely or partially remove the inner lining; you should leave it intact.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	 Therefore, you must extend it at the appropriate time with your fingernail in front of the affected area and cut it according to symmetry.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	 And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a hook and cut it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	 But if three days have passed and there is still something inflamed under the affected area, then let it be until the swelling subsides, carefully scrape it off, and cut it according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	 And be careful with the tip of the tool, because that is not necessary.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	 And therefore treat it with something that will heal the wound from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	 And if it is cut too short and you follow the instructions above, that will not matter.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	 And take care of him with water until he is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	 Chapter 58.  (Latin "capitulum" means chapter, and the number 58 is written as lviii in Roman numerals)
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	 About the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	 Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or congealed blood clot, or by an inflamed or swollen part, and it appears similar to those we have mentioned before regarding the ways of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	 And if the urine has not dissolved and the retention is due to a stone already in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	 Then place the patient's feet on their back and stretch their belly upwards from behind, and have the patient press their hands as much as they can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	 Thus, at that time, the neck of the bladder is constricted, which causes the stone to be expelled towards the back, and the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	 And if it is not dissolved with the water we have mentioned and a strong cause has been applied to the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction from him using an instrument called a syringe, which looks like this: It should be made of silver and be very thin and concave, similar to a bird's quill, about one and a half palms long, with a narrow cannula at its tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	 The sentence seems to be describing a procedure for the drainage of urine. Here's my attempt at translating it line by line:
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	 And make the patient lie on his side, and insert an olive oil and rosemary mixture into his bladder and penis.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	 And then carefully insert the catheter until it reaches the tip of the penis; then fold the penis back towards the navel; and then push the catheter into that area; and then push that into the bladder, and the patient should feel when it has reached an empty space, and this is not done in a specific order, but rather goes into the opening where there is resistance.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	 And then slowly pull out the catheter with a small piece of wool, because the urine will soak the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	 Then remove it and continue the treatment with more urine, and use the catheter again, do not stop doing this until the bladder is completely emptied and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	 Chapter 59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	 On the use of enema for the bladder with sponges and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood, or severe pain, and you want to instill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a sponge, and this is how it looks:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	 "Until the extremity of the patient is numb, it remains closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	 "And there are three holes in it: two on one side, and the same number on the other side.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	 "At the beginning, it is a concave place where that which is removed is placed. This depends on the quantity that is thrown out, without addition, until some cause draws out the humidities with it, then it is drawn out. And when it is expelled long, according to how much clampcedra mixed with naphta is used in sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	 "Therefore, when you want to prohibit humidity in the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out with it the liquid that is expelled from the aforementioned parts, because the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	 "Then insert the end of the clampcedra into the penis as we have mentioned in the surgery; then expel the humidity with it, because that humidity will reach the bladder immediately, and the patient will feel it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	 "The shape of the subtle cristery with which the bladder is crystallized, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	 And if it is made of silver or lead, whose tip should resemble a small feather, and afterwards you can introduce it into the wound.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	 And then take a pig's bladder, and place the liquid you wish to congeal inside it. Then tie it tightly between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that liquid over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	 And then insert the end of the congealer into the bladder.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	 And then press your hand on the bladder with the liquid, and squeeze it strongly until the patient feels that the liquid has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	 But if you do not have a bladder, then take a container of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce it through its entire circumference; and then insert strong thread into those holes, so that they are sewn together; and then add the circle in such a way that it is added tightly, because you place inside it one of the liquids, oils and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	 And then you tie it to the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and press with your hand until the liquid reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	 "Capitol" in this context likely refers to a chapter or section number. The Roman numeral "lx." stands for 60. So, the translation would be:
De extraccio de peyra.	 De extracción de piedras.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	 Here is the translation of your text:
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	 "And we hold the stone on which we perform the operation with our hand, and cut.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	 "And the stone generated in the bladder is precisely that which is placed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	 "And I am now explaining this clearly and concisely.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	 "So I say that the stone generated in the bladder mainly occurs in children; and one of its signs is that the urine excreted from the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and sand appears in it; and the patient feels pain in their penis, and often has to urinate frequently; and with this, the anus is closed with many of these.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	 "And healing for children afflicted by this is successful until they reach fourteen years of age; but it is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	 "However, in young people it is easier because it is common among them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	 "And of that [condition] from which the stone is larger, the cure is easier; and if it is small, it is the opposite.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	 "So when we come to the cure of this, it is necessary at the beginning that we cleanse the patient with the Christ's sign, which extracts all the fissure that is in his intestines; for this fissure sometimes prevents the expulsion of the stone because of its inquisition.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	 "And then take the patient by their feet and rotate them back and forth to make the stone descend into the bladder or move from its place sometimes.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	 "And then make that cut between your prepared hands and let the patient's things fall down, so that the whole bladder can be made to decline towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	 "And then search for it and all of it, removing it entirely from within.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	 "So if you feel the stone in the space, immediately cut over it with a section [instrument].
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	 "And if you do not succeed in removing all of it with your touch, then you should anoint your left index finger with oil, or the little finger if the patient is a young adult, and insert it into their rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	 "And search for the stone within until you find it under your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	 "And turn it little by little so that it enters into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	 "And then press on it with your finger and push it out towards the lower parts near the place where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	 "And command the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and instruct another assistant to extend the patient's legs upward with their right hand, while pulling downward with their left hand on the cord below the genitals, near the place of incision.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And now interpose a small spatula, the shape of which is as follows:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	 And make an incision in that area which is between the buttocks and the genitals, not exactly in the middle, but rather nearer to the left side of the pelvis; let the incision be on that stone, and your finger should be in the rectum, and the incision should be transverse, so that the external part of the incision is wide and the internal part narrow according to the size of the stone as far as possible, but no larger, because if you press too hard with your finger that is in the rectum, the stone will come out without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	 And know that some stones have angles and edges, which makes their removal difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	 And such a stone, resembling a bean in appearance, is round, and its removal is easy to perform.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	 Therefore, if it is the kind of stone that has angles and edges, adjust it [the forceps] in the cleft.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	 And if it is not thus removed, then you must invent for it, or apply to it a suitable instrument, the tip of which should be like a file with which you scrape over the stone, and do not leave it; or interpose under the stone a thin, curved instrument.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	 Based on the context and the pattern of the text provided, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	 If the stone is more than one, at first you should press your hand on the opening of the bladder and then cut into it; after that, push a little water in as well. Similarly, act if there are more than two stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	 And if the stone is very large, it is ignorant to cut into it with a large incision, because you cause the patient one of two outcomes: either they die or they endure continuous dripping of urine, due to the fact that the area is not fully healed.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	 However, induce the expulsion of it until it is removed, or use forceps in the incision to extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	 Therefore, when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with dressings of aloe and dragon's blood, and bandage it tightly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	 And place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rosewater and cold water, on it, so that the abscess may be diminished more cautiously.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	 Then lay the patient on their back and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	 And when you have removed it, wash the area with water and a lot of oil, and then treat it with a daily application of diaphanous ointment and with diabolicum ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	 The provided text is written in Occitan, an old Romance language that was widely spoken in southern France and parts of Italy during the medieval period. Here's a line-by-line translation into English:
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and oppose it with any suitable remedy until the patient is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	 And in all hours of treatment, you should lay both cushions and adjust the medications that have been placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if the stone is small and is in the bladder, and it is fixed within it, and retention of urine is forbidden, then treat that with water that I recommend earlier to avoid dryness, because excessive use of this treatment has been accused of causing dryness; and I have experimented with this, and it is that you should take a needle made of iron wire, the shape of which is like this:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	 of a triangular tip, sharp, and fixed in a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	 And then take a thread, tie the bladder with it below the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	 And then insert the iron into the bladder, easily piercing until the needle reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	 And slowly rotate the needle with your hand in that stone until you make the hole large enough for it to pass through completely; because the urine will be released immediately.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	 And then press your hand against the part of the bladder stone that has exited the urethra, because it is stuck and blocked by urine, and the patient will be healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	 But if for some reason you cannot perform this treatment, then tie one thread below the stone and another above it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	 And then cut through the stone in that urethra between the two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	 And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	 Then untie the bandage and cleanse the coagulated blood that has formed on the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	 And it is not necessary to tie thread below the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other thread above, for when the thread is untied near the edge of the stone, the chain returns to its place and covers the wound. ię
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	 And for this reason it is necessary that when you tie the thread above, you lift the chain to the parts above, or return your compliment as the case may be, and cover the wound in this way as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	 Chapter 61
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	 On the Extraction of Stones from Women
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	 This phrase translates to: "Stone in women is rarely generated." In medieval medical contexts, "stone" often referred to gallstones or kidney stones, so this line likely means that such conditions are uncommon among women.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	 "However, if stones appear in some of them, then its cure is difficult and it is forbidden by many methods." This passage suggests that while stones are rare in women, treating them is challenging and subject to various restrictions or prohibitions.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	 "One of the reasons is that the woman is very often a virgin." This line implies that one reason why treating stones in women is difficult is because they are frequently virgins, which may add to the complexity of their medical care or treatment options.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	 "And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who is well-educated and who reveals herself to the doctor when she is chaste or one of the women without husbands." This sentence indicates another challenge in treating women with stones: finding a knowledgeable woman who is willing to seek medical help, especially if she is unmarried or considered chaste.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	 "The third reason is that you do not find a woman well-versed in this art, especially the operation with the hand." This sentence suggests that there is a lack of skilled female practitioners who can perform manual medical procedures on other women.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	 "And the fourth reason is that the location of the incision for removing stones in women is far from the stone itself, which requires a deep incision, and this is feared." This passage explains another difficulty in treating stones in women: the incision necessary to remove them is distant from the stone's location, requiring deeper cuts and causing fear or concern. ️
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	 "However, if necessity forces you to do this, then it is necessary for you to take a female doctor who is well-educated, and such women are rarely found." This sentence emphasizes the difficulty in finding a skilled female practitioner when treating stones in women becomes necessary.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	 If you lack that (skill/knowledge), then seek a midwife who is skilled and experienced in women's matters, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	 Therefore, present her and command her to do everything you order from the inquiry about the stone at the beginning; which is why she should check if the woman is a virgin, then she should insert her finger into the vulva and seek the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	 Therefore, if she finds it, she should cut it off with her finger, then command her to scratch on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	 But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and search for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder and press it firmly.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	 Therefore, if she finds it, then gradually draw it out from the opening of the bladder to the external parts with the same caution until it reaches the level of the hip.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	 And immediately scratch on that position at the top of the vagina up to the level of the hip, wherever it may be, and keep the stone in that place, and do not remove your finger from the stone while cutting it off under it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	 And the section should be small at first; then introduce the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the amount you know will make the stone pass through it.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	 And know that the types of stones are many: for they can be small and large, round and sharp, long and round, and have ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	 Therefore, you should know the types of stones from this: indicate what you want to say about what you mean.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 And if you see a flow of blood, place powdered vitriol on the area and let it sit for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	 And make sure you have prepared with you the instruments mentioned in the removal of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	 And if you see a flow of blood and know that the bleeding is from an artery that has been cut, then place powder on the area and press it firmly with cloths and stricture, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone alone and do not extract it, for otherwise the patient will die quickly.
E aprop cura la plagua.	 And then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 When the sharpness of the blood has subsided after some days and the spot is swollen, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	 Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	 On the incision of hernia
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	 A hydrocele is nothing more than an accumulation of moisture in the white bag, which is below the cord of the testicles containing the egg, and it is called a bag.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	 And sometimes it is in the proper peritoneum which nature has prepared for him in the departure of the egg, until another egg arrives; and this is the cord of the testicle between the white bag that we mentioned, and it is not just that, but later.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	 And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that happens in the testicles, so that this material flows into them, and sometimes it happens due to a blow to the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	 And this moisture has many colors, for its color is either yellowish, or blood-red, or red, or black and foul, or it is watery white, and the latter is the most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	 This sentence appears to describe signs or symptoms of a condition related to water accumulation in the body. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	 And if the moisture is in the proper layer of fat, then the abscess will be round with an opening, and by this one estimates that it is another egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	 And if the moisture is between the cord of the testicles and the white sack, then leave the treatment to God (i.e., let nature take its course).
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	 And when you wish to know the color of the moisture, then examine the color of the moisture in the abscess with a clean cloth; and judge what is inside according to what appears on the outside of the cloth.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	 Therefore, when we come to the treatment of him with iron, it is necessary that we order the patient to be bloodletted if it is possible for you, and frequently empty his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	 And then have him lie on his back over some high support, and place beneath him clean cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	 And then sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, extending his wand to one of the two sides at the cord of the testicles and the opening of the anus.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	 And then take a spatula broad and thin, and carefully cut the cord of the testicles from the middle along its length up to the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	 And let the section be made according to correct practice, at an equal distance from the line that divides the genitals, until it reaches the white membrane.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	 And peel away that [area], and observe, and be careful not to penetrate it; and use the instrument with which you are peeling, carefully, as thinly and delicately as possible according to your ability.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	 Then pierce the membrane full of water with a wide puncture, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	 And then separate the two lips of the section with a hook, and extend the membrane towards the parts above; and do not touch the cord that reaches the genitals, and incise the membrane in whatever way is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	 And incise it entirely or in pieces, and especially its thin part, for if you do not carefully scrutinize the incision of it, it is not certain that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	 But if the instrument proceeds from that outside of its cord during your operation, then after you have completed the section of the membrane, return it inside, and then adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitals with sutures, and then heal that as well as the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	 And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary for you to tie off the vessels that are on the suspenders, and extract the egg, and then cure it with the water that we have mentioned.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	 But if the water is divided into two parts at once, then know that there are two hernias. Therefore, cut that part just as you did in the other one; and if it seems to be one operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	 And then you clean the blood, and introduce into the incisions wool soaked in oil or refined oil; and place outside another wool that you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over two genitals and the navel of the belly. Place cloths and pillows on top, and tie them securely with a bandage according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	 And then take two cloths and soak them with wool according to this appearance; and make the ends with which you press firmly with cotton or wet wool, and attach them securely in the groin area of the trousers, and one end takes from the buttocks into the back, and the second takes at the place of the penis, and two ends underneath on two cushions, and two other ends on two ankles, and all the binding should be adjusted in the groin area of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	 Based on the pattern of the previous translation and the similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's my attempt at translating this sentence:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	 And it is similar to Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	 Then pierce with that instrument and ensure it is ignited until all the moisture has been expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	 Then extend the instrument with a hook, and excoriate with a hook, and excoriate with a fine ignited cautery; and incise that according to what is possible for you until you have eradicated all of it; and be careful that the flame does not touch the bone.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	 And know that this operation is safer and less prone to bleeding than one performed with a scalpel.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	 But if during the operation an abscess appears at the time of incision or cauterization, or there is bleeding, then you must treat whatever difficulty arises for you in this way, with the appropriate care as has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	 But if the patient is timid and does not wish for a second operation because of its horror, then administer perforation as we recommend here; it is when you are certain, based on what we have said about the symptoms, that that hernia is aquous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	 Then you must have the patient sit on a high stool, then pierce the abscess in its lowest part with a lancet, and hold the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	 "And let it be opened widely so that all the water flows out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	 And then place a cloth on top of that and press it, so that the remaining water drains out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 And then take care of that until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	 But if there is resistance to the draining of water at that time, you should puncture it: and this is not done except for this reason, because the white skin around the opening of the wound resists and prevents the outflow of water. Therefore, it is necessary that you insert into the wound a pen or instrument with which water is extracted from dropsy patients, as described above; or place a small cup over the wound in the opening.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	 And know that the water will return and may be retained for almost six months or a year; and when it is accumulated, then it should be punctured in the same manner, because the patient will thus spend his days [in this condition].
Capitol .lxiii.	 Chapter LXIII
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	 On incision for fleshy hernia and its treatment
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	 Know that in the incision of this hernia, there is danger of loss in major cases; therefore I have seen its removal and being saved by this method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	 And I am remembering the operation in that and the species of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	 Therefore, I say that an abscess is born in the bodies of which the genitals are constricted, and this happens for several reasons: either due to acute bitter superfluity, which is infused into the genitals, or due to blunt trauma.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	 And the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the body, and it is not found in pain, and this is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	 And if the abscess becomes stone-like, its color will be dark, and there will be no sensation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	 And sometimes it is caused by a knotting of the arteries, and by inflammation in such a way that its memory is already perceived, or by inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	 But what is caused by inflammation of the arteries is recognized by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it is not necessary for that to be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	 However, that which is caused by inflammation of the vein is not dispersed from it by any means due to pressure with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	 And it is possible that incision be made on this type and on other tissues; and this is what you should do: cut the skin of the genitals, then spread the membrane over the parts above, and extract that which is in the scrotum, and release the suspensory ligaments from the vessels, and tie them off, and cut the suspensory ligaments after you have released them from all parts of the testicles. ✓
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	 If the egg is already set with those meats, then it is necessary that you remove the egg and introduce that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	 If there is an adhesion between some part of the intestine or between what is inside the abdomen, then it is necessary that you remove all that adhesion and introduce a round probe.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	 But if there is a tumor in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then it is necessary that you introduce everything that is of it, and remove the egg as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Therefore, once your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	 Chapter .64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	 Of the treatment of a hernia caused by wind.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	 Wind is an abscess wrapped in a membrane similar to bladder with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	 And in the treatment of this illness, it is necessary to beware of that which was mentioned previously.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	 However, we must say operation on it according to what the first ones did.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of your provided sentence:
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	 And then make an incision with a sharp, narrow blade through the right of the vessels until the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	 And then scrape clean all the places just as we told you in the extraction of arrowheads that are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	 And then place in them a needle with a double thread, and tie it first at the front of the places where the vessels are located, and then tie it again at their back.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	 And then make an incision in the middle of that place with a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what has accumulated from the foul and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	 And then treat the wound with the same treatment used for other wounds in which you want healing to be induced so that the vessels do not close too soon, because this is not harmful.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	 However, if the vessels are all cut, then it is necessary to extract the testicles or to sew up the testicles with the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the cutting of the vessels and that they are not swollen, or so that they are not joined with them.
Capitol .lxv.	 It seems like there might be some confusion or missing information in your request. The text you provided appears to be a title or section heading rather than a full sentence with content that can be translated line by line into English. Could you please provide the next part of the treatise for me to translate?
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	 "On the care of intestinal hernias.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	 "This hernia occurs due to a cut that extends on the abdomen from the sides of the navel, causing some intestines to protrude through this opening.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	 "This rupture is either of the navel or of its extension, and these two types occur due to various causes: blow, fall, loud noise, lifting a heavy object, or similar events.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	 "The sign of this, when it is an extension of the navel, is that it occurs gradually over a long period, not suddenly, and is an abscess that forms inside due to the navel pressing on the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	 "The sign of this is when it is due to a cut in the navel, for at first it causes a sudden and severe pain; and it appears as a swelling under the skin, different from before, and this is because of the protrusion of the intestine, with its body appearing outside the navel.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	 And sometimes the intestine is accompanied by a piece of cloth, and this type of hernia is called an inguinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	 And sometimes it is caused by flatulence, and sometimes a tear occurs in the intestine, which is then retained there, and this is very harmful to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	 And in the treatment of this type of illness with iron, caution is required because it is necessary to avoid cutting into that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	 And the manner of operating on this is to command the patient to return the intestine with their hand to the inside parts of its cavity if it obeys its retraction, and then turn them onto their side between your hands, and lift up their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	 And then stretch the spermatic cord, which is the cord of the testicles, towards the top, and cut through the entire length of the cord of the testicles; and then place two needles in the lips of the incision according to what you require to open the incision with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	 And if the incision, according to its quantity, allows it to be made without difficulty.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	 And then carefully remove those sacks which are below the cord of the testicles, until you discover the white hard sac from each side.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	 Then insert your finger into the space where the testicle is, between the white sac which is below the cord of the egg, and between the second sac, and dissolve with that adhesion which is in the rear part of the egg.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	 Then take the cord of the testicles in both hands, and with that draw out the white sac onto your left hand, and lift the egg with the sac to the section area; and command the assistant to stretch the egg upward, and you dissolve the adhesion behind with complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	 And carefully search with your fingers to ensure that there is no part of the intestine wrapped in the hard white sac.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	 But if you find any part of it, then peel it away towards the belly below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	 Then take a needle with a thread made of x threads, and insert it beneath the end of the sac which is below the cord of the testicles, which is called section; and then cut off the ends which protrude from the thread until there are four threads left, and then tie some of them together in the shape of a cross; and bind with that the sac which we have said is below the cord of the testicles with two strong knots.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	 And immediately wrap the ends of the threads and bind them firmly so that none of the vessels that nourish these can transmit any cause for which an abscess does not form here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	 And place another ligature as far from the first ligature as three times the width of a thumb; and immediately leave between these two ligatures an opening which is below the cord of the testicles equal to the size of the thumb, and cut off everything else in a round shape, and remove the egg.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	 And immediately cut in the place below the cord of the testicles, so that blood and pus may flow from it, as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	 And immediately apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; and apply the ligature which we have recommended (and sometimes the white end is cauterized, which we said near the cutting of the testicle to prevent blood flow, because many times it happens this way) and leave the ligature until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	 But if the fall of it is delayed, then dip it in hot water and place it on top until it falls off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 And immediately treat the wound with another treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	 It seems like there's a typo or formatting issue in your message. Could you please provide the text that needs to be translated?
De hernia ventosa.	 Of wind-borne hernias.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	 In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has been daring enough to treat it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	 And the first ones said that it is done in this way, as we have recounted in the hernia that occurs with violence; which is that you tie the vessels near the section on that [hernia] with gentleness; and then dry in the middle of the area around the abscess with water that opens that [area], until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	 And treat the wound as we have said, until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	 Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	 About the displacement that occurs in the anus.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	 Sometimes a rupture occurs in the anus as we have said, and it protrudes from the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	 And do not give the genitals any reason for the intestines [to protrude]; and if they do, that is little; and it returns to normal in all hours.  (This sentence seems to have a metaphorical or humorous tone.)
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	 The text appears to be discussing a medical condition involving the intestines or bowels and their relationship with a specific part of the body called "ciphac" (possibly related to the Latin word "cyphus," meaning hump). Here's a line-by-line translation:
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	 And the treatment of him is with a pointed cautery as described in his narrative.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	 And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then you dry the affected area of the bursting abscesses with a section according to the width of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	 And then strengthen the white cloth under the strap until it is revealed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	 And then take the reed and place it on the prominent part of the cloth, and press it against the patient's belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	 And then sew together the two prominent parts at the end of the cloth, adjusting one to the other with stitches.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	 And then remove the end of the reed, and do not cut all of the cloth, nor extend the hollow, nor any other cause as I will tell you in the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	 And then treat it with the same treatment as for wounds, and when you have cut the threads, clean it and restore the wound until it is healed; because the cloth is contracted and does not fit the prominence of the rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	 A pointed cautery is better in this place, because it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	 It looks like you provided "Capitol .lxviii." but did not include the actual text to be translated. If you could provide the full sentence or paragraph from the medieval medical treatise, I would be happy to help translate it into English line by line.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	 Sure, let's translate that step by step:
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	 "Many times the scrotum of some men is softened because the tissues between them are softened, and it is believed that this is true for him.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	 "Therefore, it is necessary for the person treating him to make the patient lie according to his disposition, and cut off all of the softened scrotum above the natural scrotum; and then he should join the two lips with stitches.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	 "And if you wish, in the beginning cut off the excess of the softened scrotum with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	 "And then cut between the stitches, and then care for the other wounds until he is healed and the threads fall out.
Capitol .lxix.	 "Chapter 69.
De castracio.	 "On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	 "You should know that castration is forbidden in our law, but it has been related to me, and I remember it in this book; the remembrance of it is necessary only for two reasons: one is so that a doctor may have knowledge of it when questioned about it, so that he may know how to care for those on whom it occurs. The other reason is that we often have need of castrating other animals for our benefit, such as mules, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	 And thus I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by tearing or by cutting with a dry method.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	 But in that which is performed by tearing, the method of the operation is to have the beast cease breathing in hot water until its testicles are softened and lengthened and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	 Then take those with your hand until they are completely resolved and do not appear below the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	 But in castration performed by cutting and dry method, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press its spermatic cord with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	 Then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut over each testicle with one incision until you have processed both testicles.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	 Then cut those parts that you will have skinned.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	 And do not leave any scab on them, except the subtle one which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	 And this method of castration is better which is performed by tearing, for tearing leaves very little scab of the testicles so that the beast desires to mate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 Then treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	 Chapter 70
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	 Of the treatment for hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	 Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when a figure like that of a woman's pubis appears in the space between the testicles, in which there are hairs.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	 And sometimes urine flows from that place, which is located in the space between the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	 But in women, it is of one kind: and that is when the woman's vulva is like two men's testicles, a little smaller at the outer edge just like the foreskin of a man and with two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	 And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	 And it is necessary that you first remove those attached tissues until the swelling subsides, and then treat them with the remedies for other diseases.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	 And in the second type of men, where there is urine in the space between the testicles, there is no treatment or surgery for him.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	 Of swelling and prominent flesh due to causes of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	 Lentigo, which is a common condition related to natural causes, occurs until it becomes excessive and requires treatment; in some cases, it is magnified in certain women to such an extent that it spreads as it does in men and is transmitted during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	 Therefore, you must remove the excess of lentigo with your hand or with oil and vinegar.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	 And do not end with vinegar, especially on the face, to prevent blood flow.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	 Then treat it with remedies for skin diseases until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	 However, flesh born is flesh that grows in the uterus of the mother until it fills her (and for this reason some call it "tailed illness"); therefore, we must treat it like we treat lentigo, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	 Chapter .72
De curacio de alratica.	 About the treatment of alopecia.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	 Alopecia is when the woman's vagina is not perforated, or the opening is too small.  (Note: The term "alratica" and the description given here do not correspond to the modern understanding of alopecia, which is hair loss.)
E es o natural o accidental.	 And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	 Accidental is the illness that has preceded it, and this is caused either by flesh not properly joined or by a subtle or thick splinter.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	 And this occurs either in the womb of the mother, or in the ribs of the child, or in the upper part of the body, or in the lower part. You should prohibit cutting, penetration, and pregnancy, and strongly prohibit menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	 The recognition of this is done by the examination of the midwife, if the opening is apparent, immediately; but if it is not apparent, then you should search for it with your fingers or with a ray [of light].
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	 But if the opening is due to a thin splinter and it is close to the two lips, then you cut and remove it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	 And place over the two lips a powder of rose petals, and immediately after that place your index fingers on both sides together.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	 And the woman should lie on her back with her hips spread, and then spread the two lips with force until that thin splinter is broken and the opening is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	 And immediately take wool and dip it in oil and place it on the area, and go with a man for the day so that the torn flesh is not healed.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	 "But if the tumor is large and thick, then it is necessary for you to cut it with a spatula of lead or with a leaf of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	 "But if the swelling is due to an infection, then suspend it with hooks, and cut it open.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	 "And with you should be the medicines that stop bleeding without cauterization, such as aloes, dragon's blood, and glasswort, mixed with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	 "And then administer a wide lead probe so that the wound is not prematurely healed.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	 "And keep it there for several days, and apply lard to it.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	 "And then treat it with the other healing method until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	 "And sometimes this happens during childbirth, and then you should cut according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	 "But if it is due to a hardened abscess, then for the hardened abscess that is in the womb, do not make an incision in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	 "Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	 "About the treatment of hemorrhoids and tail, and red buttocks that occur in women's genitals.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	 And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and I will say the same about those that receive care and those that do not receive care.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	 Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and hernias, when they are in the womb of the mother and do not appear to the senses, then in those cases, treatment should not be done with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	 But those that are in the opening of the mother and are felt by sensation, those are the ones that can be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	 And it is necessary that you place the woman in a cold room and then extend her with forceps or with rough cloth, and incise those with the razors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	 And then you should sprinkle over them one of the powdered bloodless incisives without pain, such as henbane and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	 And then you should wrap her feet for one hour, and then place her in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	 And if the bleeding persists, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peels, and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	 And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice with water on the back of the patient.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	 And if the blood is severed, it's good; otherwise, apply two cupping glasses and to the breasts without scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then take wool and soak it in either celery juice, or honeysuckle juice, or rosemary juice with white wine and apply it to the area; then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	 However, you should ask for advice from someone who is experienced in this matter, so that you may write down what seems best to you according to what I have said in this language as well.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	 Chapter .74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	 On the perforation of the eardrum occurring in a woman.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	 Many types of swellings occur in women, such as crabs, aphthous ulcers, ulcers, piles, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, gout, and other swellings.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	 And I have already mentioned these diseases and the types of them, and their signs, and their treatments in the section on women.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	 And it is fitting that I should say in this treatise on the abscess that occurs in a woman when it is of the type that does not heal easily, and if you want to know how its operation is performed with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	 Certainly! Let's translate the text line by line into English:
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	 And then the midwife should follow the right and left side of the woman, with the instrument that is used to open the mother's orifice, whose shape will be described shortly.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	 And when you want to administer this instrument, place it with the ray (or handle) on the perineum of the woman, and make sure that only as much of the instrument enters the woman as the length of her perineum.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	 But if the instrument is longer than the perineum of the woman, then you should place pillows on the surface of her perineum to prevent any part of the instrument from entering her perineum.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	 And it is necessary that you place the edge of the instrument on the left side, and that the one administering it holds the instrument and turns the edge until the mother's orifice is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	 And when the protrusion appears and is touched by hand and is smooth and moist, then you should dry that place with a broad paddle.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	 And when the pus has been evacuated, then place on the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil, which should have some styptic properties; and apply pressure to the opening at the woman's perineum.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	 And place outside the mother and on the pillow clean wool dipped in water in which there are mallows.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 And let it be treated for approximately two days with an ointment that you should apply until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	 And sometimes the mother and the wound are washed together with water and honey until it is crystallized, and then with water in which there is ground lily or long aristolochia, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	 And if the wound is deep in the mother's flesh, then you must refrain from treating it with iron, and care for it instead with water as we said above in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	 Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	 To teach the midwives how to treat pregnant women when they are sick according to an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	 It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of a natural birth by its signs, and this is when you see the woman pushing from below and she wants to smell the air, and because of this she is relieved from what is above her during childbirth, and hastens the expulsion of the fetus. Then you know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and it is the baby's head emerging first, and the second comes with it, either suspended or hanging from the umbilicus.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	 When you see those signs, then it is necessary to press the stomach so that the embryo descends gently, because when it comes over its head, they give it the second blow, and it is cleaned of those superfluities with a good cleaning.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	 But that which happens in this case is unnatural and not to be praised, because when the embryo has come out of its feet and the body comes out before its head and its feet, and one hand comes out at the foot or at the head, or the head and the hand come out together with the stomach, it is easily turned over on its neck, and it resembles the figures of the unpraiseworthy.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	 Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these matters, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	 And I am showing all the figures of these, and what intelligence is in them, so that it may be known by this and may have been established on this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	 When the fetus has come out of its head by natural weakness, and that is very strong on the woman and it is difficult for her to give birth, and sometimes the strength of the woman is already weakened, then do this thing: have women hold her, and evaporate the head of the child with hot fennel seed and moist oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	 And immediately insert the catheter between its said small blade and slit, or cut it with its nail until you find what is within it in moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	 And press on the woman's belly until the child descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	 But if it does not descend, then the woman must be anointed with a mixture of ptilium and fenugreek seeds with vinegar.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	 And immediately command her to lie down and anoint her, so that she is compressed and make her sneeze forcefully; and hold her mouth and nose closed for one hour, because the child will be expelled quickly afterwards.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	 And if both hands of the child have already been expelled at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them little by little with gentleness.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	 But if it does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a chair and lift her legs up, and immediately turn the chair over on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the jolt.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	 And if the hands are not turned inside and the child dies, then cut them off and extract the limbs of the child or tie its body to its hand with a cloth and pull it out equally, because that will be expelled.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	 "From the excretion of the fetus onto its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	 When the child excretes onto its feet, then you should immediately wipe them off, and then turn the child over, and then wrap it up, and then take one of its legs and stretch it out little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	 However, when it has excreted into its clothes, then you should command the child to express itself, and make it sneeze with conditions, because otherwise it will be constipated if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	 And if it is not relieved by the water that we have recommended, then you should return the child little by little until you place it according to its natural position, because then it will be relieved with a light excretion.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	 And if it is not helped by all the water that we have recommended, then take of powdered aloe and dissolved gum, and pound them well in the mortar, and then anoint with this water the concavity of the woman's vulva, as low down on his belly as possible.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	 And then make it sip warm water until it reaches the hypochondrium (the area below the diaphragm and above the navel).
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	 And when you see that the parts of his body are softened, then make for him a fumigation of myrtle and apply it to him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	 And when you apply sublimation (or smoke treatment) for an hour, then you make the patient lie down on a stool, and then make them sneeze and clear their mouth, and lift them up, and press the lower part of their abdomen with light compression, because this will quickly expel the wind.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	 And place the child on its knees and support it with your hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	 When the child exits in this manner, then you carefully insert your little finger into its mouth bit by bit; and then the woman should lean over the child's head, and its legs should hang down, and these should rest on a pillow, and hold its hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	 Then press gently on the child's abdomen, and then extract what is left behind its legs from the ears until it is ready to come out of the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	 And if the child is not expelled, then take its legs and move them vigorously, and then press gently on the hypochondriac region until the child comes out of the above parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	 Then insert your hands and carefully pull out the child bit by bit, and command the woman to push until the child is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	 It seems that you're working with a text that is influenced by medieval medical treatises written in languages related to Latin and Romance languages like Italian, Spanish, and French. Let's translate the given sentence line by line:
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	 "If you succeed in reducing the hand of the patient, but if you cannot do that, then raise the woman and make her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	 "And if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed, and strike her sides vigorously with a pillow or cushion filled with moss.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	 "And if the birth has occurred, then make her sit on a chair, and proceed to reduce the hand, and bring the child back into its natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command her to push until it is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	 "Then place the child on his mother's lap, with his hands outstretched and his face against her back.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	 "Have the midwife hold the child's hand and then gently roll him over, little by little, to make it easier for him.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	 "And when he is turned and has been brought out, then place on his navel that which we have prepared with oil and moss.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	 "And then command her to vomit little by little, and when you have done that, make her sit on a chair and command her to lean over her right side, and then command her to push; and make her sneeze forcibly.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	 "Exitus foetus praeparati super latus" means "The exit of the prepared fetus onto the side." In this context, it refers to a fetus being positioned for delivery with its shoulder or side presenting first.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	 "When the mother experiences horror in this manner, consider this: then you should incise the second uterus with your nail until it is evacuated of its moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	 And if the swelling is suspended on the face or neck of the patient, then cut it at the navel, so that it is not constricted and does not die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	 And then push the swelling towards the inner parts until you place it in its proper location, and send the woman to fetch some warm compresses, and the servant should apply them gently, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	 Twin birth or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	 Know that twin babies are often born prematurely, and sometimes three or four are born at once, but this is rare and unfortunate. However, this can happen due to natural causes, not unnatural ones.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And as for those (twins), whether they are multiples or not, a second one, and if they are separated by the navel, distinguish between them based on the ligament in each of their navels. Sometimes they are born as if they were a single fetus by natural birth, and sometimes they are born by a birth that is unimaginable, as we have mentioned.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	 And if some of them are difficult to deliver and you reach the point where we mentioned concerning unnatural figures, then care for them as we have described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	 And if the midwife is skillful and performs this with ease and subtlety, and slowly, and let her be inventive according to every figure as it is prepared by the intellect for health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	 And remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and is miscarried.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	 Sometimes a womb can form one, two, three, four, five, six, seven or even ten (fetuses), and it has already been verified that one woman miscarried six, while another miscarried ten all formed, which was caused by the measurements of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	 And all this should be known to the midwife because she quickly recognizes that appearance, and therefore she should proceed with it accordingly.
Capitol .lxxvi.	 Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	 About the extraction of a dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	 When you treat a dead fetus as we have said in the section on treatment, and it has not yet come out, then you will be forced to use manual operation. Therefore, you should consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and does not suffer from any of the conditions that put her at risk.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	 Then it is necessary for the woman to be positioned on her left side with her head inclined downwards and her hips raised up.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	 Based on the context and similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	 And then you moisten the mother's mouth with a mixture of oils, honey, and a blend of herbs including althea, fenugreek, and linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	 And then anoint the midwife's hands with those oils and balms, and then gently insert her hand into the mother, and then search for the place where the fingertips will rest on the baby.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	 And in this case: then consider if the baby is ready to be born by breech delivery, and then place your fingers on its heels, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or under the chin, or on the sternum, or near the ribs, or below the hypochondrium.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	 But if the delivery is by the feet first, then in the pubic region or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	 And it is necessary that you hold the fingers with your right hand, and place the curve of them in that place which is between the teeth of the left hand, and gently insert the hand, until the baby reaches the pelvis.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	 And then place and position another finger, or a third if necessary, in order to create equal traction and not just extension along its line.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	 Based on the given context and similarities with Latin and Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the sentence:
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	 And it is necessary that the area between them be softened; and if any part of him is retained, then it is necessary that the midwife anoint some of her fingers with oil and gently insert them, turning with what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	 So if the part of the child is forgotten (i.e., not yet delivered), then the fingers should be changed in that place where it is more hot; and do this until the entire child is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	 But if the hand is protruding before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to its swelling, then a cloth should be wrapped around that hand; and then carefully pull it out until it is completely delivered, and cut it either at the junction of the hand or in the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	 And thus you should do for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 But if the head of the child is large, or if there is swelling during delivery, or if there is water in the head, then it is necessary to insert between the fingers a thin spatula and split open the skull and draw out the water, or discover it with an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will be shown with the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter following this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	 And similarly act if the injury is serious by nature: then it is necessary to cut off that part with a saw or to take it away as we have said; and afterwards extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	 And if the head is swollen and constricted, you should make an incision until the fluid that is in the feet is released.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	 But if it is not complicated, nor does it respond to swelling, then you should immediately cut the head as much as possible according to what seems best to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	 And if the sides of the abdomen are swollen or there is an excess of fluid, then you should pierce it until the fluid drains out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	 But if the injury is on his feet, then his pull is light and his direction towards the mother's vagina is gentle.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	 But if the abdomen and feet are constricted, then it is necessary that you extract that part with a cloth wrapped around your hand, and that you cut open the abdomen and feet until the fluid drains out of them.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	 But if the other members are missing and the head is turned back, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's vagina is open, then she should insert her hand into the hollow of the air (public area), and search for the head with it, and draw it towards the mentioned (openings) into the mother's vagina, and afterwards insert one or two fingers into him, and pull him out with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	 And if the mother's mouth is constricted by an abscess that occurs on the person, then it is necessary not to cause the patient discomfort; rather, it is necessary first to administer an infusion of moist fats.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	 And apply poultices; and follow up with the patient using waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	 And if the abscess is on the side of the body, then if it is possible, let it be punctured: and administer the water that we have said for a live abscess.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	 And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and removed.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	 And care must be taken that no cause remains inside the wound.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	 And when you have completed all your operations, then administer the water that we have said for the treatment of abscesses that occur on the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	 And if there is a flow of blood, then place in stiptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	 And I have seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and then over that fire another pregnancy, and then the other fetus is also dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	 It happened to her that she had a long-lasting abscess in her navel; and it became so inflamed that the skin burst open, and she began to pass her limbs.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	 And I was called to care for him, and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	 Then I placed strong adhesive plasters on him for some reasons, and an [unspecified] bone came out of him, and after a few days, another bone came out; and I was greatly amazed, because there is no bone in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	 Then I thought that these were bones from the dead child (or fetus).
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	 Therefore I examined the wound, and extracted many bones from him, the woman being in her thousandth month of pregnancy. And she had lived in this manner for a long time, until a small arm came out of him.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	 And I did not consider this to be strange, but rather because in this there is knowledge and assistance for what the doctor does with his hand to administer care.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	 Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the child (or fetus).
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	 The shape of the forceps used to open the mother:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	 This is the shape of the strengthener into which the leaves are inserted, and when inserted, there are two forceps at each end of the two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	 Sure, here's my attempt at translating that line:
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	 Certainly! Here's a translation of the provided text into English:
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	 Based on the provided context and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	 Another similar form, but more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	 It should be made of ebony wood or beechwood according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	 However, at its end there are two additions like this, and the length of each of these additions is about a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	 And when you want to open the uterus with these [instruments], then you make the woman lie down on her back with her legs hanging, and open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	 And then open your hand with the instrument in the same way as you do with forceps, according to the amount you want of the lip of the uterus's mouth until the midwife does what she wants.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	 The form of vertigo that the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	 A form of pushing with which the child is pushed out.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	 A form of pressing with which the head is flattened
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	 And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the end, like this. Sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, like this, with teeth like saw teeth with which one cuts and flattens.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	 Certainly! Let's break down this sentence step by step:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	 This translates to:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	 The text seems to be discussing a specific form or method that involves two needles or spines. Here's a possible translation of the line:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	 The form of forceps with which the child's head is compressed:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	 The shape of a spatula with two ends used to cut the head.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	 The form of two wide spatulas.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	 All these instruments are practiced, and the more species of them are multiplied and prepared by craftsmen, the easier it is for their operation and the more useful they are for people due to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	 And do not lack those instruments wherever you go, because the need for them is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	 Of the extraction of the afterbirth (placenta).
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	 When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, then you should order the woman to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with force, and strengthen your hand over her mouth and nostrils, and if it comes out this way, good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	 And if not, then you take a cloth and pierce through it a hole, and place in that burning herbs at the mother's mouth, such as calament and rue and anise and camomile and scordium arabic and cassia wood and santolina.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	 "All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the pot, and place it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	 "Then place a reed tube in the mouth of the patient, and hold it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the patient.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	 "Then make them sneeze as we said, and the second night it will be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	 "But if this treatment persists and is not effective, then you should instruct the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or mallow lotion, and insert it into the vagina, searching for the second child. Once found, gently pull it out little by little. But if it is connected to the uterus of the patient, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and once you find the second child, extract it slowly, following its natural path so that the patient does not suffer from intense cramping.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	 "Beforehand, it is necessary to permit the sides of the chest to expand easily.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	 "And then adjust it according to the amount of traction, because it will obey and will escape from its attachment.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	 And if the mother's mouth is closed, we have already begun the treatment with suction and with a medicine made from oil and herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	 But if it is not cured with all the reasons we have mentioned, then be careful not to repeat this process of extraction, but rather let what has been removed from him go to the mouth of the mother, and then cauterize that area with an ointment and a compound medicine; because that will cause it to rot within a few days and then dissolve and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	 But when it rots, it raises a very bad smell in the head and in the stomach, which harms the patient; therefore, at that point, it is necessary to administer substances with a pleasant scent and appropriate for this purpose.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	 But some of the ancients have already tried using fumigation with dried grapes and figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	 The method by which a woman is fumigated for the retention of menstruation and the second trimester:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	 It should be made of glass or iron.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	 And the narrow end should be placed in the vagina, while the wider end is held over the fire, and the smoke should be directed towards the coals of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	 And have that (fire/heat) applied until that (smoke/vapor) is completely consumed, and then apply another (one).
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	 Of the treatment of an infant's unperforated anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 Many infants are born with their anuses not yet pierced, which is a delicate and hidden matter.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	 Therefore, it falls to the midwife to pierce this secret place with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp stick, and be careful not to touch the membrane (or perineal tissue).
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	 And then place over it some wool soaked in oil and vinegar; and then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	 But if you fear that it may close up again, then insert a tube into the opening for many days, and remove it when the infant wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	 And if the anus is closed due to the healing of a wound or abscess, then that healing must be cut open, and it should be treated afterwards as we have said for wounds and with lead (ointment).
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	 Of the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	 Fistulas that occur in the lower parts, which are thick and large, occurring near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	 And it is either a fistula or hemorrhoids.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	 And when that node is old and the humidity is watery white or subtle pus, sometimes these fistulas are penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	 And those penetrating are known by that which exits from them due to outflow and flatulence; sometimes the patient uses this outflow, and it is easy for worms to exit from them as well.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	 And sometimes those fistulas penetrate into the space of the bladder, and into the penis; and sometimes they penetrate into the joint of the hip, and into the bone of the thigh.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	 And how a penetrating fistula into the anus and non-penetrating is known, is that you put your finger into the anus, and introduce a subtle tent of iron or silver into the fistula when it is not turbid.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	 But if there is turbidity in it, then introduce a subtle tent of lead or horse hair into it until you feel the tent or the hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	 And if you do not feel it at all nor does any of the discharge proceed from it, whether it be worms or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and thus turn to its treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	 And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the opening of the penis, then its significance is the issuance of urine from there and a prohibition that the location be treated with medicine until it is healed.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	 But if it penetrates into the hip joint or into the bone and causes pain in the surrounding area, then its sign is that the tentacles enter here if they are not stuck in the bone, and pain in the surrounding area of the affected part; and that from it there will always be pus; and that no medicine will work for it, nor will it be healed with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	 And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure, and the treatment of them is labor and vanity for the foolish doctors who are fixed upon them.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	 But in those that do not penetrate and are not ancient, healing with iron is hoped for, as I will recount to you, and this I have already proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	 And it is that the patient lies between your hands with his back turned to you and raises his legs towards him, so that his hips are inclined towards his belly, and then interpose a lead probe, or iron if there is constriction in the fistula, until you know the place where the probe enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	 And if that makes the patient uncomfortable around the neck, then you should insert your finger into the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if you feel in your finger that the vein has already opened by itself and is exposed, or if you feel between your finger and it a slight pain, then know for certain that it has penetrated; and then do not work on it, because there is no cure there, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	 But some say that it heals late in some men.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	 And for the treatment by which help is hoped for him, it is that you take a subtle cautery fire according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned before, and insert that fire into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those carnal tissues resembling a quill are completely adjusted.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	 And then cure that with gauze wrapped in bandages until all the adjusted tissues are healed, and then treat it with medicines that promote tissue growth and healing. If it is healed, well and good; otherwise, it will not heal at any time by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	 And then cleanse those fistulous flesh parts which resemble the hollow reed of a bird, and let nothing of them remain.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	 But if blood flows between you and your operation when you cut into those flesh parts, then use milk or an instrument with acute medicine to cauterize it with fire or medicine, because cautery with fire has two good habits: it is the adhesion of the flesh and the drying out of moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	 Then wrap that [wound] with clean rags or linen until the area becomes warm, and then treat the wound with ointment to promote healing and strengthening of the flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	 And these medicines have astringent and drying properties; when it is restored, it is considered healed and you should not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	 But if the fistula already extends into the rectum and is elongated on the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it with that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	 And therefore, if you find that the opening is closed or covered with membrane or flesh and it is near the rectum, then do not operate on it, but rather treat it through faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	 And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula and it goes along the back of the buttock over the surface of the body with the string and along the edge of the buttock, then take a perforated probe, which looks like this:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	 and wrap the probe with five threads or around it, and then insert the probe with thread into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	 However, if it penetrates deeply into the edge of the anus, then you should extract the thread from that opening by inserting your finger into the anus; and draw out the end of the thread, and join the two ends together, and tighten each one, and leave it like this for a day or two. And when you see that the thread is deeply embedded in the flesh, tighten it well so that the flesh between the two ends of the thread is tightly bound and closes up.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	 Then treat the wound until it is healed and cured.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	 But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrated, then make it penetrate, in whatever way you have prepared, as long as it is very close to the skin, because you should not do this so that you don’t cut the scrotum; and then do it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	 Certainly! Here is the translation of the given sentence into English:
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	 "About stitching hemorrhoids when blood flows from them.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	 "Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they appear like coals in the rectum, or they are accompanied by a fatty substance.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	 "And they can be small or large; the blood that flows from them is either always present and one drop at a time, or in drops, and it can be outside the anus, or at its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	 "However, those that are outside the anus are of two types: one with little moisture, from which flows citron-colored water or a little blood continually; and they are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	 "And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to order the patient to sit and to press until the anus comes out and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	 "Then take hold of them and suspend with the fingernails that you have them with your nail, and then cut off their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	 "But if the fingernails are not held by them due to their moisture and softness, then take those with a rough cloth or a thread or a wool string, and pull those out with the said things, and then cut them off and sprinkle on them some warm powders near the incision, so that they serve as cautery for those; or cauterize those as previously stated in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 And immediately care for those with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	 And if the rectum does not obey an evacuation, then administer cathartics to the patient with a cathartic that contains a small amount of bitterness, and wash it with water from the colon so that it may gently obey the evacuation when the patient is pressed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	 But if the hemorrhoids are protruding from the anus, then the cause is slight, and it is that you take them with your finger or that you take them with tongs, and insert them, and immediately care for them with the water we mentioned until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	 And he who has made an incision should administer suture in the following manner: take thread wrapped around and inserted into a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids at the parts above, and make that penetrate with the needle into the base of the other part, and wrap both ends of the thread around the part below the needle, and so longitudinally; and bind the hemorrhoid tightly with strong sutures, and then knot the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	 And do this for all (affected areas), and leave one of them untouched, so that the excess blood will flow out from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	 Then place a clean cloth soaked in rose oil or wax over the affected area, and place it on the wound, instructing the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Then leave that (cloth) in place until it dries; and when it is dry, treat the area with ointment or another remedy until it heals.
De curacio de fistulas.	 Of fistula treatment.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 Many ulcers occur due to dryness of the fissure or due to natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 And since they are old and not helped by this treatment, then you must scrape them with the tip of a spatula or with your nail until they become wet, and remove the crust of pus from their surface, which prevents them from healing; then treat them until they are healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 Then you remove them with a sharp instrument, causing abundant bleeding and excoriation; then treat them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	 For the treatment of almesamir, which is a fistula.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	 Know that alamermar is a fistula, and it is nothing but a round knot according to the color of the body, resembling the head of a nail, and it occurs in all parts of the body, especially under the feet and in the joints, and from this pain you should know its location.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	 And then it is necessary to cut that which is around the nail, and hold it with tweezers or pliers, and remove it from its root; then cure that area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	 And if you wish, cauterize the second part as was previously described in this chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	 But warts are small, rough, round projections on the surface of the body, and they are often seen on the hands of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	 And its cure is to stretch it and cut it, or to tighten it with thread or hair so that it falls off.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	 And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with a sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	 And after they have been removed, both inverted and uninverted, using the instrument that I will describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	 But a mole is a small, feathery or rough projection on the surface of the body, usually appearing on the face, and when the cold attacks it, it feels like the bite of an ant, and it spreads around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	 And its cure is to take a reed from a swan's feather or a vulture's feather, and it should be strong, and place it on the mole until the circle of the reed contains all of its parts; then roll your hand with the reed until you cut that which is around the mole, and place it on the face of the flesh, and remove the mole from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	 If you wish, perform this with an iron or bronze needle according to this method:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	 If the opening above the needle is fine and not piercing, wrap it so that the sensation of touch on the finger is dulled and the rotation is slowed.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	 And if you wish, cauterize the ant according to what was said earlier in the chapter on cautery for atheyl.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	 About the shapes of the instruments that are used to give relief.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	 Sometimes relief is given with silver or copper, cast or hammered; and sometimes these instruments are made small or large according to those to whom they are administered, because the one that is administered in the care of small children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are rough or painful, their reliefs should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	 The shape of a large and few reliefs:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	 The tip of the needle at the top, where the bag is attached, should be wide in this manner; and there should be a distinction where the bag is tied like this:
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	 And the lower end, which is inserted into the buttock, should be blunt (that is, not open), resembling a lion's tail, tapering to a point; and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should correspond to the thickness of the rays and slightly larger.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	 And let there be a bag in which the medicines of bladder of beast or of wool of sheep are placed, and its size should be one palm (or hand's breadth).
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	 And let it be pierced by fine needles in the same way that it is rolled up; and if the space between the needles is the thickness of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	 And then insert into those needles a strong thread of raw silk, which should be from these same threads, or wrap them around; and fasten the bag with it; and when the bag is placed in it, tie it tightly at the top of the cross between two ends with great pressure, and then bandage each needle: But the way to bandage it is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which should be heated according to the patient's tolerance; and make sure that it is not too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	 Then let the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs up and place a stool or a bench underneath them; and then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; and then insert it into the anus gently, and then let the assistant take the bag and squeeze it with two hands and press it strongly until everything in the bandage is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the bandage and let the patient raise their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	 Based on the given context and the similarity of the language to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the sentence:
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	 Certainly! Let's break down and translate the sentence step by step:
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	 And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a very fine and thin probe, similar to those used for baptizing infants.
De curacio de las plaguas.	 For the treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	 I have already mentioned in the section on wound treatment what is appropriate for this book, and now I will describe the treatment of wounds using both hands and medicines according to their nature.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	 Therefore, I say that wounds are classified according to how they are made and the location on which they fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	 And the reasons why many times wounds are made are such as striking by stone, or cutting with a sword or knife, or piercing with a spear, or a club, or an arrow, or similar to those other causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	 However, the wounds that are in specific locations of the body are such as a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the chest, and similar to those of other members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	 And I am describing the treatment of some wounds so that you may use that reasoning and rule for other wounds as well.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	 And I will begin with the treatment of simple head wounds, because the memory of compound fractures will come at the beginning of the third chapter.  (In medieval medicine, "compound" referred to complex or severe wounds, not just open fractures as it does today.)
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	 "Therefore, I say that when a simple blow to the head occurs and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to the impact of a stone or something similar, and if the artery has been cut only slightly but it is a severe wound and you fear the formation of an abscess on the patient, then you should act quickly and perform phlebotomy on the temporal artery immediately; do not delay this. Extract from him as much blood according to his strength, unless there is any other reason that prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood coming out of the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	 "And let the phlebotomy be done on the opposite side of the wounded part; and ensure that the patient avoids fullness, overeating, and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	 "But if any cause prohibits bloodletting, then the patient should be put on a lighter diet and avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	 "And place on the wound, if an abscess forms, cotton dipped in plain oil or wine that has been made astringent.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	 "But if the formation of an abscess is certain, then place on the wound, if it is fresh and has not been exposed to air for too long, a small amount of the powder that I will mention shortly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	 And if the air has already changed that, then place some ointment over it until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	 But if the wound is large or caused by a blow and appears unnaturally deep, and its lips are not properly aligned, then align them with stitches as I will explain the method of stitching.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	 But if the wound is already exposed bone and there is no retention of it but only a slight suspensory ligament, then incise that area and subsequently treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and instruct the patient to consume foods rich in: heads, fish, and similar items until healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	 And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all that is putrid and clean it out, and then treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	 But if there is an artery or vein in these wounds from which blood may flow and it has not been cut by medicines, then you should look for the artery, and if you find it uncut, then cut it with a spatula, or ligate it; and if what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	 And if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is light; so you should sprinkle this powder over them because it will solidify before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	 And the manner of making this powder is as follows: take one part olive oil, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts calcined shell; all should be finely ground and sieved, and with it the wound should be filled, and a good bandage applied until it heals well over it.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	 Then strengthen it above with bandages and leave it alone, and do not remove the bandage until it is healed, because the medicine will not be effective unless it is completely healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	 And sometimes this alone acts as a precaution, when you do not have olive oil and dragon's blood at hand.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	 And perform the same operation on large wounds when it is necessary to cover them and keep them closed, and these are fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 And if the air has altered them, especially in the summer, then this powder is not intended for that, but rather you should treat them with the water we mentioned earlier, so that you place on them some digestive ointments, or you can place on them a paste of barley flour with water and honey until they develop pus; and then treat them with the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	 But if it happens that there is a bone fracture, and it is small, then you should extract it with tweezers.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	 And I say the cure for skull fractures involves something called trephination.
De las plaguas del col.	 Of neck wounds
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	 But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is like a simple head wound.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	 But if the nerves of the neck have been cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there is no need for a stitch but rather avoid treatment with something that causes strong astringency, such as zinc and iron (which are similar to them) because they irritate the nerves and contract that part.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	 And do not place any pressure on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold and its continuation is with the brain, which is the most important of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	 And if it is treated with light medicines, such as being washed with sweet water, sometimes infused in rose oil or non-rose oil, and cleansed when washed with sweet water and other stones diminishing according to this method, and moist bandages.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	 Certainly! Let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	 But if during the treatment an artery has already been cut and blood flow is present, then you should separate, dry, or bind the wound, or cauterize it if necessary.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	 But if you have already cut the tendons of the throat or all of them and managed to save the veins of the neck, then you should sew the lips of the wound with a thread over the cane of the throat and do not touch it; beforehand, clean the area and return it to its natural shape, and then strengthen it with a decent dressing, leaving it for several days; afterwards, treat it with ointments that have styptic and astringent properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	 But if the wound has already affected the bone, then you should drill into it, and if there are fragments of bone inside, remove all that you can; and what is not apparent to you, leave it until the wound heals by itself, and the infection is separated and the pain is alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	 And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on it the powder that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	 But if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with the remedy that will be mentioned later in this chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	 "Of the wounds of the neck or similar, when made between the shoulders and done with a sword, dagger, lance, or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	 "If it is a thrust by lance or dagger, and you measure its depth, then consider more if there is bleeding when the patient coughs; in this case, know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	 "And if the wound is not deep and it is recent with its own blood, then in the first hour you should apply powder to it, and do not strain it so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returns to the heart and causes the patient harm; rather, apply drawing ointment, and dress it two times a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	 "And if the ointment is not at hand, then you should place cotton over the wound opening so that it absorbs moisture from the humors; and make sure the patient sleeps on the wound so that the liquid inside is drained.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	 "But if three days or more have passed since the wound and no spasm, tremor, heart distress, or difficulty breathing occurs, and you notice the other good dispositions of the patient, then know that the wound is healed; and from then on, treat it with bandages and other care until it is fully healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	 "But if the patient's healing is delayed and it has been open for a long time, then know that a fistula has already formed; therefore, treat it according to its own principles.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	 "And if the wound is caused by a cut from a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with water that has been prepared for stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	 "But if it has already affected the bone and there are some heavy pieces of flesh from the cut, then turn the wound and try to extract those pieces if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	 "But if they are not separate, then leave them inside so that the wound can dry out, and their removal will be easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	 "And for other wounds that occur in other parts of the body, the treatment is the same as we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	 "Of the wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	 "The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either great, small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	 "In the case of a great wound, sometimes the intestine or its nerves are affected because their insertion is more intense and more delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	 It seems like the text is discussing a medical procedure involving the reduction of hernias or prolapses. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	 And therefore the best rupture is the middle one, because in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, unlike the two previously mentioned types.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	 And know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but there are two common sutures that are also suitable for suturing other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	 And the two other sutures are common to other wounds, but nevertheless they are more specific for the suturing of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	 And I will now describe each one to you with an explanation and description.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	 Therefore, I say that when the wound is small and there is some intestine coming out of it, and it is difficult to reduce, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	 And therefore, when it is so, then you should scrape it in such a way that you submerge a sponge or cloth moistened only with warm water, or one taken in boiling water with cumin, pepper, cloves and other herbs to reduce the inflammation of the intestine.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	 And in some cases, it is beneficial to use an astringent, and it is better for the resolution of inflammation than water alone.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	 And when you see the inflammation being resolved, then moisturize the intestine with water in which althea and mallow have been boiled, because by this it is relieved of its discomfort with little effort.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	 But if the intestine of the patient cannot be relieved with this treatment, then cut the disruption a little with an instrument that is used to cut hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	 And the primary treatment is better when it is appropriate and not excessive, so that there is no need to dry out or cause weakness.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	 As for the instrument, consider its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	 One part of it should be sharp and curved, and the other part not sharp. The tip should be thin, but not as thin as a spatula; instead, it should be blunt at the end.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	 And so when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural shape, in its proper place, if possible over water, because it is better this way.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	 But when the disruption is large and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should elevate the head and feet higher than the middle parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	 And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then place your attention and consideration always on this so that the side with the injury may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	 And in this way, you must administer it for both large and small wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	 And for small wounds, make sure that the one who administers it is between your feet, holding the wound completely with his hand and closing the lips of the wound; then discover whether there is any cause to apply another suture.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	 And this is the common method of suturing: first take the needle, or count the number of needles according to the size of the wound; then pass the thread through the end of the wound on the little finger, and tighten the thread, making sure not to put a knot in both ends of the cord. With two ends of the thread, place them under the parts within, until you make that part penetrate from that side; and after adding two ends of the thread and two ends of the needle, you have made four stitches.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	 And then strengthen the double stitch around the edge of the wound, and sometimes both parts together, and then join the two lips of the wound for decent closure; and then lay the thickness of the finger and insert another needle in it, and then tie it with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this with needles until you have completed the entire contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	 And let the needles be moderate in size between thickness and fineness, for fine needles slightly cut into the flesh; thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin, and therefore it is necessary that they be moderate in both fineness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	 And it is not necessary for the needle to be inserted into both ends of the skin too close together, so that the flesh is not slightly cut and the wound does not split before healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	 And do not extend the stitches too far, so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	 And then trim the ends of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping; and place on the stitches soft pads from all sides, which have the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the wound is healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	 And these kinds of stitches with needles in any manner are more suitable for small wounds, because for the stitching of them only one or two needles or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	 But the second stitch is more common: and it is that you apply the stitches to the four extremities, of the tendon and two extremities of the sinew, at once, with a needle in which there is thread wrapped around in both delicacy and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	 And then when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, return the needle from that same part where it began, so that the thread may rise to the higher part of the wound, so that the stitch is like a stitch in cloth which holds the clothes tightly together.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	 And place between each stitch the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	 And this stitch is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	 And with such a stitch I sewed the wound which had happened to a man in his belly, who had been wounded by a sword, and the opening of the wound was more than one palm's width, and it was protruding around two palms of the intestine from the middle part, and the opening was in the middle of the member; and then I returned that after the intestine had been out of the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	 And the wound was healed within fifteen days or thereabouts, and the patient was cared for and recovered; and then he lived for many years after, continuing with his usual habits.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	 And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and it was by miracle, for I did not cure him with an ointment, because it was in a place where no ointment or any medicine was found, but I placed on the wound a clean cloth two times a day and frequent washing with honey water until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	 But I will describe two types of proper stitches according to the teaching of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	 And it is that you begin with the stitch of the cord, and insert the needle from the outside to the inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	 And thus when the needle penetrates the thread and you have made a loop, straighten it along the entire length of the body, leaving the end of the thread which you inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate again from the inside to the outside in the other extremity of the middle.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	 And thus when you have made that penetration, then you make that same penetration again in the same extremity of the middle from the outside to the inside; and leave the end of the thread which is in this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other extremity from the inside to the outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	 And have it penetrate with that, your penetration with which you make it penetrate in the cavity at the end of the observed part, which is within him, so that all of it enters.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	 And then begin from this side of the cavity, and with that [instrument] penetrate to the other side, and remove the needle from the thread which penetrated, and then reduce it into the same thread and bring the end of the cavity on this side to this end of the observed part; and remove that [thread] from the part nearest him.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	 And do this once and again, and do it one time close to another until you sew everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	 And the summary of this method of suturing is that you sew with a skin stitch with which you sew the skin, so that you sew the cavity once from the end of the thread, and leave that other time until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	 But the second type of suture, which is called Galenic after him and for which he is praised, is that you sew it according to the semilunar stitch with which some doctors sew, so that they bring all the separated parts back to their natural place; and they apply one end of it and the end of the observed part to the other end of it, and this is done as I have recommended to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	 Sure, let's break down and translate the given text:
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	 And then turn each of those (parts), and make each one penetrate from the inside out towards the two extremities of the mentioned body, except for those that are on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	 And this manner of stitching is better than common light stitching, and it is the stitching that was mentioned before.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	 This is the account of Gaul
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	 And some will say to you, the closure of the belly is done with two needles, so that you insert a thread into each of them, and begin by introducing the needle from where it should be, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the stitching method used for closing the chest equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	 And know that when there is a rupture in the middle of the belly, then its closure is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	 But the judgment of treating wounds is similar to that of other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	 Which is because when you find the fresh wound with its blood before the air alters it, and you reduce the intestine and close it and prepare it properly, then place over it a powder that promotes healing.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	 Based on the context and the pattern of the text provided, here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	 And if the patient feels pain or putrefaction in their intestines, which many times happens, then you should cauterize that area with six points of black stiptic, especially if the perforation has occurred in the intestine and there is a penetrating exit wound into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	 And know that that which affects the large intestine is of lighter healing than that which affects the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	 And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "cecum" does not heal from any wound that falls upon it; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it, and the magnitude of those veins within it, and the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	 But if what proceeds from the wound is the intestinal lining, and you can find it fresh, reduce it in the same manner with which you reduce the intestines.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	 But if it has passed into the cavity and is already turned green or black, then you should strengthen that area with pitch on the affected spot, so that blood may flow out, because in the lining there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	 And immediately you will incise that which is other than the bandage, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from the part below the wound on you, so that the attraction of the patient towards you may be relieved. Then remove the cloth and issue the arm from the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	 Recollection of wounds when they occur in the intestines.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	 When disruption occurs in the intestines and it is small, then it is possible for it to be restored in some men. This is because I have seen one who had been wounded in his belly with a thrust of a lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound had become old and had formed a fistula, and from it came out excrement and wind.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	 Therefore, I pursued his cure already because he was not entirely cured, but I continued to treat him carefully until it healed and the place became consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	 And I, since I saw that the place was already consolidated, advised the patient to expect some bad event in his belly; and no one expected any bad event, but he remained in good spirits, eating and drinking, and then he entered a bath and exercised in his words.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	 And some experienced individuals have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be tied off in this manner: you take large-headed ants and then align the two lips of the wound and place one ant with its open mouth over the two lips of the wound. When it bites onto them, strengthen its grip, and then cut off its head, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	 Then place another ant near the first one, and continue doing this with ants, one after another, according to the entire length of the wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	 And then return that [the intestine with the attached ant heads] and sew up the wound; and let those attached heads remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause the patient any harm.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	 And it is also possible to tie the intestine with a fine thread made from the intestine of an animal attached to it, since it is more like a needle; and it is that you take the end of these intestinal threads, and it should be very thin, and then tie the end of it with thread, wrapped, and then insert that thread through needles and sew the intestine with it, and reduce it in the opening.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	 And this method of stitching with ants is only secondarily a way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	 But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, for then it is not a simple matter but rather a delicacy, and it will not heal completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	 On the treatment of hemorrhoids and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	 Know that any wound or abscess that becomes old and chronic, turns into an ulcer, does not heal and lasts for a long time without bursting, is universally called a fistula, and we call it hemorrhoids.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	 And a fistula in truth is a hard, tough, white nodule with which there is no pain, and the cavity within it is like the cavity of a bird's feather; and for this reason that ulcer is called "pene rizatz," that is, feather.  (Note: "Pene rizatz" seems to be a play on words with "pena de ausel" which means "feather of a bird.")
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	 And it is in some people wet, which lasts for a long time; and very soon the moisture is absorbed within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	 And sometimes this moisture is thick, and it is little, and it is coarse, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	 Here is a line-by-line translation of the given medieval medical text into English:
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	 "And it is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of a fistula that is created through surgical intervention using the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	 "And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for among these are fistulas that affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the intestines, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the composite joints such as those of the hand and foot; and these are those that are close to the main member and similar in appearance.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	 "Therefore, that among these fistulas which is according to this manner is of the most difficult cures and does not accept treatment, and dealing with it is laborious and ignorant.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	 "And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach those places mentioned earlier, and you hope for its healing and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe made of iron or lead, and if the fistula runs straight, investigate it with the probe.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	 "But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle lead probe, for lead due to its lightness is easily guided and bent according to the twists.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	 And if the fistula has terrifying words, it is not your place to interpret over it with intention.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	 Therefore, irrigating the terrifying orifices with other orifices is necessary, for the humidity used to irrigate those will go to the others and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	 And then inquire carefully, according to whatever method is possible for you to know whether there are bones or nerves here, and whether the cavity of the fistula is distant or nearby, or if it is a fistula that has terrifying words and this is all within your strength, with your understanding, which you use to understand the patient, and the invention of the pain should be your pressure with the hand on the spot, and similar to the significations and the accidental causes of the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	 And when you have stood over all those causes with true steadfastness, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula nearby or in a salted place, distant from a joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or one of the places which I have told you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Then you dry out the fistula as was said before in its description, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupt flesh, and whatever has emerged from the orifice of the flesh, whether it be pus or similar substances, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	 Here is the translation of the provided text:
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	 And do this with that some times until the sharp medicine dissolves everything that is soft in the cavity of the fistula of the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	 And then restore it with ointments that promote healthy tissue until it heals.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	 But if it does not heal this way, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	 But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of it, then inquire into that area and dry it out as we have recommended, unless there is any obstruction of a vein, nerve, or major limb, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	 But if the bone is exposed and there is any corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it until all the corruption is removed; and then heal it with water that promotes skin growth until it heals.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	 And if it does not heal and produces pus as before, then you know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and therefore you must expose it again with great care, scrape it thoroughly, and cleanse it with the strongest solution you have, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	 And so if it is healed, it is good; and if not, then know that this corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore you cannot do anything about it except to try to reach it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	 And if the bone is slightly corrupt, and it is possible for you to pull it out, then do so with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	 And if there are many bones, then skillfully extract all of them, and do not leave any behind with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	 But if you encounter any resistance due to the humidity, and there is no fear or mistake in making the incision, then cut those ligaments or flesh that are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	 But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at that moment, then place something on the wound that will keep it moist, and leave it until that region becomes soft with flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it does not become consolidated, and constrict the section that you have cut during your operation. 
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	 Let's translate the given text into English line by line:
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	 If the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or hip bone, and only the surface of it is affected by decay, then scrape away the rotten part from behind until the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	 However, if the decay has spread to a large part of it and has reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to cut away all of it until the corruption has been completely removed, and then treat it until it has healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	 And I recommend that you remember this, which happened to a man in his hip, as an example and guide for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	 There was a young man around thirty years old who experienced pain in his hip, and from the inside part it spread to the inside of his body until it reached the hip, and it was a matter of an abscess with a large abscess, and there was no external cause for it.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	 And so the time was prolonged with it due to the error of the doctors until the abscess burst, and pus flowed from it, and his treatment was then paused until his thigh was made into a fistula, and in him many openings were made which all drained pus and the humors of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	 And then a multitude of doctors gathered around him for two years, and none among them knew more about the art than I did, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	 And I saw his thigh and the matter that flowed from him through those large vessels; and already the body of that man was completely decayed and his color was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	 And then I inserted a probe into one of those vessels and the probe reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	 And soon after, I explored all the orifices and found that they reached the bone from every part of the thigh.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	 And then I cut and incised into one of those orifices until I discovered a part of the bone, and I found it to be corrupt, and already it was earthy and rotten and blackened; and already a part of the thigh was corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow. 》
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	 And then I removed that which was revealed and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	 And I believed that it was not in the bone itself but rather in that corruption which I cut away and removed, and I had already scraped it away.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	 And then I applied remedies for healing the wound with consolidative medicines for a long time, but it did not heal.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	 And then I will cut and expose again according to the initial exposure, and I will find continuous corruption with the bones.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	 And I will take care of that which appears to me from that corruption, and then I have been pierced to make the cure and restoration of him, and he is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	 And then I exposed him again and did not stop cutting the small bones piece by piece specifically, and I pierced his restoration, but he was not restored until I cut around one palm's width of him, from which I extracted the marrow, and then I restored that with medicines, and it became slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	 And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on him or to cut further, except for the disposition of his weakness and the little tolerance he has and fear of death, because he faints at all hours due to an excess of bad syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	 And therefore, he is healed by complete healing, and there is nothing hard in the place of bones; and his disposition has been well established in his body and his strength has returned; and he lives according to his dispositions and does not contradict him in walking or harm him for any reason.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	 "And place a plank under the bones respectfully, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to use a saw that cuts through the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	 "And the sawing should be done little by little on the affected area, because if it is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear to the touch, then force will have to be applied to the saw again.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	 "And if the bone is rotten and not protruding, before you continue with the other part, check if the corruption is in the middle or a part of it. Then peel back the flesh from all sides entirely; and place a plank underneath, and then saw through the first part where the corruption has entered, until the cutting continues to the next part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	 "And the sawing should be done according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	 "And if the corruption is in a joint, cut open that rotten joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	 "And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not rational but cunning.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	 "And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is very difficult; however, you should investigate how the corruption appears to you, and cut away that part, and clean it according to each possible situation, and with whatever cunning you have, straighten it as best you can, without cutting against a vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	 And know that there are different types of saws and the sawing of these bones depends on the position of the bones, their preparation, size, delicacy, largeness, smallness, hardness, and rarity; therefore, you must prepare the appropriate instrument for each type of operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	 And know that this operation requires you to be knowledgeable about the type of instrument needed; for you have great skill and experience in the ways of this art, and are familiar with various diseases. Therefore, you can apply the appropriate instrument to each disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	 And I conclude this chapter by listing the number of instruments you will use as essentials, with which you will proceed to your practice, and which you will test on others.
Forma de serra:	 Type of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	 Type of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	 Another type of saw is the trepan. It is used for making circular incisions in bone.
Forma de autra serra gran:	 Yet another type of large saw is the hacksaw, which is used to cut through thicker bones.
Forma de ray:	 Type of reamer (also known as a borer):
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	 The head of this reamer should be in the shape of a star-headed nail, and its points should be like those of an awl.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	 And it is not appropriate except that with this they are rubbed on the joints when they are inflamed, or if the mouth is very large.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	 A larger form of a razor than others:
Forma de razori menor:	 A smaller form of a razor:
Forma de razori lat:	 A flat form of a razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	 Another decently made form of a saw: It should be made into an arch shape from the top part and its sharpness made of iron, with the wooden handle parts decently made.
Forma de lu:	 The shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 A form of a razor which has a hollowed-out section:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 Another delicate form of a razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 Another curved-tip form of a razor:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 A small form of a razor resembling a scorpion's tail:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 The form of an incisor with which bones are cut.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 Another smaller form of an incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 The shape of another incisor, this one resembling a ray, with its tip like a saw, and it is used in many places on the bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 The shape of a file which is suitable for scraping out the marrow from the bones.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 And its tip is triangular and pointed.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	 And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly, it is necessary that all the rules we mentioned for razors, scissors, and saws apply to this as well.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	 Regarding the incision of extremities and the cutting of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	 The extremities can be amputated for either an intrinsic or extrinsic cause. If you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the treatment does not work, sometimes the corruption will go to a member which has not been affected by any cause. In this case, it is necessary to incise that member where the corruption occurs, so that the patient may avoid death or a greater deterioration of the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	 And the sign of this occurrence is that the member becomes black until it is believed that fire has burned it, or you can perceive a similar blackness until gangrene spreads throughout the body of the patient; and then proceed with the incision of that part.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	 Similarly, if the cause of the corruption is from a venomous strike, such as from a sea scorpion, viper, or a similar creature.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	 And if the corruption or swelling is at the tip of the finger, then you should incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to enter the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	 And similarly, if it spreads to the hand, then you should incise that from the root of the finger, and do not give space for the corruption to enter into the forearm of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	 And if it spreads there, then you should incise the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	 And if the corruption passes beyond the elbow and surrounds it, then at that point is the death of the patient; and to administer any other treatment in this case is futile.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	 And similarly, do for the foot when corruption spreads to the toes of the foot, then you should incise that up to one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	 And if it reaches the sole of the foot, then you should incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	 But if it ascends into the shinbone, then you should incise the leg up to the knee joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	 And if the corruption has already reached the shinbone, then in him there is no hope but to abandon the patient and let them die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	 The method of cutting or tying off the limb is as follows: you should have one bandage on the part below where you want to cut, and tie another bandage over it; and let the assistant extend a bandage to the parts below, and let the assistant also extend another bandage above; and you separate the flesh that is between two bandages into a space until all the flesh is exposed; then it should be cut or tied off.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	 And it is necessary that a cloth be placed between them and all parts of the body, so that the healthy area does not touch, and that the wound may heal properly and the abscess may be cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	 But if there is bleeding while operating, then you should cauterize the area carefully, or place some powders on it that restrain the blood; and then return to your procedure until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then bind the affected member with a bandage as appropriate, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	 And I recommend to you that if you encounter this in a man's foot, this same accident which I and you have mentioned, which is that blackness occurs in his foot with a burning that was similar to the burning of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	 And that corruption first happened in his toe before spreading throughout the entire foot.  (Here, "corruption" likely refers to the spread of infection or necrosis.)
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	 And then that man prepared for himself some putrid matter, thinking that the cure would go to the member with great vigor and would remove his pain and burning, and he inserted that foot up to the joint, and it became healthy.  (Here, "putrid matter" refers to a poultice or other topical remedy containing rotting substances, which was thought to draw out infection and promote healing.)
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	 Long ago, the same corruption occurred in the mouth of my hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	 Therefore, it came to me and I was prompted to expel that excess with the water I placed on my hand with medicines, for the cleansing of his body; and the excess did not return, but instead began to go to the other finger until it started in my hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	 And he asked me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to do that because I hoped for the return of that excess, and also because I feared the amputation of his hand would be fatal, as the vitality of the patient was fading.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	 And since he despaired of me, he returned to his homeland and it was reported to me that that man prepared himself and cut off his entire hand, and he was cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	 And I have not related this story except to serve as an aid in this disease, and that it may be a sign by which the cause is recognized and according to which the cure is carried out.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	 On the treatment of sinuses and the method of enema with medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	 When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is extended to the point that it collects pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus comes out from it, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it is also thin like fine cloth, and no further corruption has occurred, and it does not press on bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and not a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	 But if the space is prolonged to the point where corruption begins in any member, then it is called a fistula and not gout.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	 And the treatment for it is that you insert a string all the way in this manner as it is turned, especially when it is made thin and with cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	 But if you hope that the string will stick and that this corruption has not reached its final stage, and there is an opening at the end of the string, then treat it with a clyster.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	 And consider the hollow space, and if it is large, and if the arm or leg smells fetid, then treat it with an Egyptian remedy which consists of oil and vinegar and juniper berries, divided into equal parts, placed in a vessel, and heated over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	 Then you take from it the amount that is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and administer a clyster to the hollow space with this, and strengthen the opening of it, and let the medicine remain inside for the duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	 And then you remove that with a syringe; and do this for as many days as it takes to cleanse the wound and remove the stench.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	 And sometimes it is necessary to administer an enema with ash water when this medication is not available to you; and that is for you to take the ashes of grapes, place them in water, then strain that and administer the enema with it until you feel certain that the wound has closed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	 And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then administer an enema with water and honey mixed together, strained three times; and also administer an enema with wine and honey mixed together, for by the nature of honey it cleanses and washes, and the wine makes the wound adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	 And when you do this a few times and feel certain that the wound has healed, then administer an enema with water that promotes the growth of flesh in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	 And it is necessary to take Diasquama ointment and dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine; or that you administer an enema with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	 And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the cannula for the enema, then you should gradually widen it with a small iron instrument, and place in it a cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or in basilicon ointment until it is sufficiently widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	 Similarly, if the orifice is wide, then you should gather its lips together with a suture and allow only the amount necessary for the insertion of the enema without addition.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	 And if the orifice from which the arm exits is raised towards the upper parts, then dry it in the lower part of the wound so that the arm runs below, because when the arm is constricted at the narrowness of the sinus, the flesh will be generated within it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	 And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus into the lower part of the bone as you wish, then prepare the member with a preparation through which the arm may run lightly according to what appears suitable to you, and so that no obstacle will hold the arm within it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	 And take consolidating medicines which should be placed on the sinus as you wish, and extend them onto a linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	 And the cloth should be of such a large quantity that it covers all the sinuses; then with the scissors, make an incision on the right side of the sinus orifice, making a slit slightly wider than the sinus orifice; then spread some ointment from the leech kit over another cloth according to the size of the slit, and place it over the area to alleviate the swelling of the patient's arm and do not change the large cloth until about a week later.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	 But that which is on the orifice of the sinus, you should change frequently to ensure that what is in it does not dry out from the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	 And so that you may know if what flows from his arm is too much or too little, whether it is digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	 And also consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it has an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	 And when your treatment has been prolonged in this manner, and you see the material that was placed on the orifice of the sinus has adhered or is about to adhere, then you may detach it on the third day, and when you remove the bandage, then change the cloth for another and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	 Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	 And if from the belly an indigestion lasting many days has come out, then know that the belly does not adhere; and if the adherence of the belly is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you must dry it with medicines. If the medicines are humid in their substance and virtue, they should be dried like an ointment of diachylon, when there is an excess of fluid accumulation in it.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	 And the best cure for this is to take some diachylon ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and let it be applied in a thin layer on its substance, and then prepare that with him, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	 And if there is no diachylon ointment, take myrrh and aloe and sesame seeds, grind them all together and powder it over the honey which is on the fire, and then apply this over a cloth and strengthen that over the belly; and apply that with the honey which you have cooked until it thickens, and powder it over a cloth and strengthen that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	 And sometimes it is administered with him longoria and rhizomes of lilium celeste (which is lilium celeste), and flour of irises and centaury, and use those simples or ajustados, grind them and sift them and powder them over the honey which you have counted; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	 And if the swelling persists and does not heal with this treatment, then know that the corruption is in his spleen, and it already makes an inquiry in the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you cure him with a fistula treatment, as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	 Of the treatment for paronychia and nail infection, as well as for added finger incisions and amputation.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	 Paronychia is an abscess that forms at the base of the nail of the finger or toe, and it can also form on other fingers. When it persists and its treatment is less valued, it becomes a chronic abscess or it becomes corrupted, throwing pus into the root of the nail, often corrupting the entire nail, and then its corruption reaches the bone, making it smell foul, and the tip of the finger is lame, and its color turns dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	 Therefore, when you have that [condition] as we have said in the division and do not perform your treatment, then it is necessary for you to incise with an iron all the superfluity that remains of the nail and then cauterize the wound with this, because cautery is very beneficial for this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Sure, I'd be happy to help translate the text line by line. Here it goes:
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	 But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then you must cut out the affected bone and extract it, because no time can heal a corrupted bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you see the corruption and decay advancing into the finger, then cut it off at one of the joints according to the remembered method, and then treat it so that it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	 But if the nail has been struck or bruised and severe pain follows, then at first bleed the patient, and next dry the nail with a sharp spoon, making a transverse cut from above to below, and be careful that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh under the nail, for you will cause the patient intense pain, and it will cause excessive growth of superfluous skin in that place; and then treat that place with water that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	 But this superfluous skin, which is common in the hands of some men, is very light and fleshy, and very light on the bones, or very light on the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	 And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or their growth is in some joints of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	 But one who is born in certain nodes of the said [part] does not suffer, and this one who is born in the joints feels it very lightly.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	 And of those who are born fleshy, the section is light, and it is that you must lift the said one with a Latin spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	 But of one who is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, beware of the incision of him.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 But in one who is born in this with the nodes, it is necessary that you incise at the beginning of his flesh with a round incision to the bone, and then saw with one of those saws suitable for this, and then care for him until he is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	 But the consolidation that happens to the said nodes, whether by nature of birth or by wound healing or by burning with fire, or by similar causes, then it is necessary to section that consolidation until the nodes return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	 And then place between them cloths soaked in rose oil so that they are not easily consolidated, and separate between them, or place between them a thin lead sheet until it is healed as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	 "And similarly, if consolidation occurs in any of these with the palm, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	 Of the vice of swelling, they are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	 "Varices are swellings, and they are large, engorged veins filled with melancholic superfluities that occur in the members of the body, most commonly appearing in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, workers, and bearers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	 "Therefore, it is necessary that you administer black hellebore purgative to the body several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	 "However, the treatment of them with iron is done in two ways: one way is to make an incision and draw out that black blood, and the other way is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	 "The section of it is done in this way: first, apply hot water to the leg until the thick blood dissolves and becomes liquid, which is caused by the leg. Then bind the patient's leg tightly from above the knee to below the groin with a bandage. Next, make an incision in one or two or three places on the vein with a wide cut, and then lift out the black blood from below the leg with your left hand upwards, and then downwards, until the desired amount of blood has been removed, which will restore the patient's health.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	 And then bind that area, and command the patient to abstain from black bile-inducing foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	 And repeat the treatment with bloodletting when the veins are full and this is known to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	 But the elevation of them is done in this manner: you who lift the patient's leg, if there are hairs on it, first shave it; then put it in a bath and immerse the patient's leg in hot water until it becomes red and the veins become prominent; or if it is to be exercised with strong exercise, if a bath is not available to you, until the limb is made tender.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	 And then dry the cord on the right side of the vein by sectioning it in the length or at the end of it, and you must denude it, or in the lowest part of it you must find the tendon.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	 And then open the cord with scissors and strip the vein from all sides until it is felt, and you must look for its appearance; that which appears black when seen will bend downwards.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	 And so, as you remove the vein from the cord, if you see a white one, it should be left as a thread.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	 And then place that vein in such a way that it is raised and detached from the cord, and suspend it with a needle of gold.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	 Sure, let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	 And do this until you extract that which is the most supreme or highest of all sections, until it is all removed; then incise that area.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	 And if you cannot extract and elevate it, then insert a double-threaded needle with a strong wire and tie it off, or insert underneath it the reed and rotate your hand in all directions until it is expelled.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	 And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will become difficult for you to elevate that part and it has come upon the patient with that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And when you have completely removed that part, then place over the wound site wool soaked in wine and both olive oil and unfiltered olive oil, and treat it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	 And if the vein is constricted with tortuosity in which it is wrapped around the parts, and it is not straight according to what we have said, then you must make incisions all along its tortuous course and at its points of attachment, and then suspend that part with hooks until you elevate it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	 And be careful with your section that you do not cut the vein and that it does not injure that part, for it will become difficult for you to elevate that; and preserve your skill in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	 Form of the incident with which one's life is ended.
Forma de unci orp:	 Forma del uncir orp (?):
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	 It is not to the same extent as with the fingers, nor is it of acute extremity, so that it does not affect the vein; and it is of great flexibility, because if it were fine, it would cut the vein due to its fineness; and there is in it a superfluous thickness, as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	 Of the removal of the vein from the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	 This vein is generated in the thighs in hot lands, such as Almería (Al-Andalus) in Arabic lands and in the hot and dry lands of India, which are sparse in fertility and where neither grass nor trees grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	 And it is generated strongly in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	 Its generation is due to putrefaction that comes from the intestines, as do poisons inside the body, such as those from snakes, worms, and scorpions, which generate between the intestines and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	 The sign of the occurrence of this condition is that this vein, which occurs in the thigh, causes a very intense inflammation; and then the area becomes blistered; and then the vein begins to emerge from the site of that blistering, as if it were the root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	 And then when the extremity appears from the patient, it is necessary that you wrap around it a lead weight of which the weight is between one and two pounds, tighten it and let the lead hang from the thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	 And as many times as something comes out of the patient due to some cause on the outside, wrap it in lead and tighten it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	 And if the discharge is prolonged, then cut off a part of it and wrap the rest; and do not cut that which is already coming out until it has completely emerged, because if you cut it off prematurely it will constrict and enter into the flesh and cause an abscess and pus in the area and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	 Therefore, it is necessary that it be treated gently and be extracted little by little, until it has completely exited from the patient and nothing remains within the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	 And this discharge has come out of some men to a length of five palms and ten fingers, and it has already come to my attention that one came out twenty palms long.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	 And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the finger into the opening and make a long incision through the body until all of the matter has been evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and then treat it according to the treatment for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	 And this vein sometimes has large branches, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to him with many openings, and each opening is full of branches.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	 And therefore treat it as we have said in the division, and with what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	 On the removal of worms generated under the skin, and this is called cattle plague.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	 This illness is named in some lands as cattle plague because many times it happens to cows and there is a worm within which is born between the skin and the flesh, and it goes through the entire body ascending and descending, and it shows its movement from member to member until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	 And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, as happens with worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	 And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and reaches the eye, then quickly it blinds him and enters and destroys the eye, and this happens many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	 And therefore when you want to treat and remove it, then do not act unless by the sensation of its movement and appearance, and then it is necessary that you strengthen what is above it and what is below it with strong binding and constriction, and then dry it out over it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if it is swollen in the flesh and you do not find a cause, then place a cautery with fire on the spot until it dies, and the main reason to be feared is corruption of the area, as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	 And if you see that the abscess has reached near the eye, then strengthen the eyebrow with a strong bandage, and then cut it open, and extract it; and it is necessary for the patient to use purging medicines to cleanse their body of bad putrid humors, and they should avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	 About cutting due to nasal pain.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	 This illness is called in our land "nasal pain," and it is a pain that comes to some members, and often changes from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	 And I have seen it according to what I will tell you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	 I was called to see a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation on the vein of the arm, and after it had been broken for an hour, I saw that inflammation moving like a worm going upwards, but more lightly than if it were a spider, as if it were quicksilver when it runs from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	 And then it goes away from that place and settles in the muscle, and then you stay here for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	 And then it moves through the rest of the body until it reaches the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	 And then I recall that it was turning around throughout the entire body, as I saw; and I was greatly amazed at its transformation and speed from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	 And I had seen this before in my eyes in the same way, but I have never seen words that cause pain being transformed from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	 But I did not see it with the eyes as in a woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	 And I did not think that this was anything other than because the woman was old, and her body was dry and her veins exposed, and in this condition it appeared to the senses as that transformed windiness.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	 And it is necessary that this does not appear in this way due to the backward course of treatment in those who are delicate and have bodies with moist veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	 And when you want to treat the patient, and they feel this pain, then it is not apparent to the eye as we have said. Then you strengthen yourself against that, and let them lie down lightly and quietly until that constrained windiness has come out, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
De extraccio de sagetas.	 "De extraccio de sagetas" translates to "On the removal of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	 "Arrows vary according to their types and the parts of the body they strike, as their diversity lies in those with large tips, small ones, concave ones, blunt ones, solid ones; and those with three angles; and those with tongues; and those with barbs.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	 "And according to the limbs and places they strike, it is done in two ways: for the limbs are either principal members such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, and bladder, or similar ones; and therefore when it strikes one of these members and you see signs of death, which I will explain shortly, then you must avoid removing that arrow from those in whom death is most certain. But if you do not see these bad signs, and the arrow is not deeply embedded in the member, then you remove it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	 "And the signs of danger are when an arrow strikes and passes through bone, especially if it exits from the fontanelle on top of the skull, for then there is severe dizziness, tinnitus, vertigo, burning sensation in the eyes, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasms and confusion of thought, vomiting of bile, and speech is cut off and the voice destroyed. Also, from the site of the wound comes a white, powdery discharge, and the patient's eyes take on a watery appearance like that of raw meat.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	 And so if these signs appear to you, then you should refrain from the treatment and removal of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	 But the signs of an arrow wound when it strikes the heart are such that it is close to the left nipple, and one feels with it that it is lodged in a hard object, not a hollow one; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse's movement, and dark blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and a foul odor, and fainting; and thus you should know that death will come suddenly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	 And the signs when the arrow has struck the lung are foamy blood coming from the wound, and the veins near the neck are distended, and the patient's color changes, and they exhale a large amount of spirit, and they crave cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	 And if the arrow strikes the membrane located in the foot, then the pain will be near the small ribs, and a great deal of anxiety will be felt with violent pain and sighing, and not all the limbs' muscles will be functioning well.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	 And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then undigested food will come out of the wound in large quantities.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	 If the arrow hits the belly and is stuck in it, there may be a tear in the wound or tissue, or an intestine that has been torn apart, and there is no hope for his cure unless the arrow is extracted.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	 If the arrow hits the bladder and urine exits, and any cause prevents it from healing outside, and if the pain is strong on the patient, then know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	 However, the other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, and arms, ribs of the back, collarbone, hip, thigh, and similar parts of the body are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein or artery and is not a poisoned arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	 And I will tell you about this, which I have seen concerning the nature of these arrows, so that you may know what to do for their treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	 The reason is that in one man an arrow was shot into the tear duct of his eye and the root of his nose. I extracted it from him on the other side, leaving the gray hairs of his ear, and he was cured, and no harm came to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	 And if the judge is the patient, and he has not suffered a bad accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	 And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was struck in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that is the one with the feathers; and then I made an incision on that between two veins, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I took it out carefully with that, and afterward I extracted it, and the Christian man healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	 And I extracted another arrow from a man who was struck in the abdomen, and I thought he would die from it; and so, after thirty days had passed and nothing changed in his condition, I made an incision over the arrow and pulled it out, and he was cured, and no bad accident befell him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	 And I saw another man in whom an arrow had struck the back, and the wound was healed over him, and after about seven years, the arrow came out at the root of the scapula.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	 And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had struck her abdomen, and the wound was healed inside her, and there was no change in her condition, and the woman did not suffer any damage to any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	 "And I saw another man upon whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound was closed and the arrow broken off, but he felt little pain, and similar symptoms to these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	 "And the arrow was removed from the man by the king's leaders, who had been struck in the middle of his nose and had already declined slightly towards the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	 "And I was called to care for him soon after the shooting of the arrow within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	 "And then I found the wound made by the arrow very narrow; and then I examined it with a fine probe, but did not feel it; however, he felt pricking below his right ear, and so I suspected that this prick was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	 "And I covered the area with a plaster containing attractive and digestive virtues, hoping that the area would swell so that the location of the arrow might appear to me, in order to act upon it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	 "And no significant swelling occurred in the area that would indicate the arrow had reached that place; and I continued with the plaster on him for many days, but no swelling occurred; meanwhile, the wound healed, and the patient recovered from the extraction over the course of many days until one day he felt the arrow within his nose and reported this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	 And then I placed medicine on the wound that is sharp and corrosive for several days until it opened up, and with a probe I tested it, and found the tip of the arrow, which was attached to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	 And then I adjusted the medicine in the opening of the wound so that it became visible to me, and time passed with this for four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	 And after the wound was widened and I could insert forceps into it, and they remained there without causing pain, then I did not cease to be subtle and clever with various methods until one day I began to extract it with finely made forceps, as will be shown in the form of those at the end of this chapter; and thus I removed it. And after that, I healed the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	 And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage could not be restored, but I restored it and the wound was healed, and the patient was cured completely without any recurrence.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	 And I told you the quality of extraction of some arrows, so that you may take note and understand what has not been said, for the principles of this art and its definitions are not understood by mere narrative or by books.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	 And the wise craftsmen compare with a little on words; and with what is present over what is absent; and they discover new operations and new instruments for descending from the extraneous causes of the art when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	 And therefore, I say that arrows are not driven out of the limbs into which they are inserted except in two ways: either by attraction of the place into which they enter, or by contrast with the other parts.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	 And that which is thrown by the place into which it has entered, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place, and it is pulled out and driven out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	 And if it does not obey extraction at the time when it falls, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it softens and its attraction and exit are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	 Similarly, if it is stuck in bones and does not obey your extraction, then leave it for a few days and apply attraction and moisture to it each day, and it will be driven out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	 And if it does not obey your extraction after a few days, then you must pierce around the arrow in that bone from all sides with a thin drill until the place is widened by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	 Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	 And if the arrow is stuck only in the body of bone and does not pass into the abdomen, and the patient remains for several days without any of those accidents occurring to them, then you should focus on removing the arrow and treating the patient.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 But if the arrow does not comply with your efforts to remove it, then you should administer taralli around the arrow as we have recommended, and then proceed to heal the wound until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	 But if the arrow is hidden within the body and has lost sensation, then you should search for it with your hands, and if you feel it, then draw it out with some of the instruments suitable for its removal.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	 And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves or veins here, then you should cut deeper into the wound until it is widened enough to make it possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	 And if it is lodged in the ribs, then you should cut away the flesh around it from all sides as much as you can; and work on it, if you cannot remove the arrow by cutting the fracture of the ribs or twisting them until it comes out.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	 Certainly! Here's the translation for the given sentence:
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	 And if you cannot do it in your own time, then leave it for some days until the affected parts can heal, and then try again when it has been relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	 But if blood flow is causing resistance, then administer the treatment we mentioned in the previous chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	 And be careful not to injure a vein, nerve, or tendon, and administer the remedy in every possible way to avoid the arrow; do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I have advised you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	 And thus, perform the procedure in a way that aligns the arrow with the affected area, following the shape and trajectory of the arrow as it entered the body, for this is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	 But if that is not possible, then administer what you can according to the shapes.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	 But if the arrow has exited through the opposite side or if any part of it has protruded from the body, or if the tip of the arrow is bent due to the pressure of the projecting part above the collarbone, then you should cut it off; and the incision should be made according to the amount by which the forceps can grasp; and then pull it out, for it will come out easily with this method.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	 Here's the translation of your sentence:
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	 And otherwise, leave it for several days, then repeat until it heals.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	 And if the arrow's shaft is still in it, then you pull it out with your hand.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	 However, if the shaft has broken off and you wish to administer an impulse, then insert a hollow instrument into it, if it is blind (i.e., the wound is closed), a concave instrument so that the concavity of the instrument fits around the head of the arrow, and then pull it out with your hand.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	 However, if the arrow is barbed, then you pull it out with a strong instrument entering the wound, because the arrow is lodged there.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	 And if the arrow is poisoned, then you must cut away all the flesh in which the venom is located, as much as possible, and then treat it with the appropriate remedy.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And if the arrow strikes the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can touch it with your finger, and it is possible to cut over it, then cut over it, being careful not to cut into a vein or nerve. Then extract the arrowhead, and bandage the wound if necessary, and treat it until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	 "The shape of the forceps with which arrows are pulled out.
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	 "Their tips are shaped like a bird's beak, made like a saw to grip the arrow so that it is not released.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	 "And from these are made many varieties of forceps, large and few in number, according to the size of the arrow and its narrowness, as well as the width of the wound and its constriction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	 "The shape of the concave end of this forceps is like the feather of a bird, to facilitate the entry of the arrow into it, and the push of that blunt end.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	 "Shape of the blunt-ended forceps:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	 "like a ray, to facilitate its entry into the arrow's cavity and be pushed out with it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	 "About phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	 "The veins that are commonly used for phlebotomy are XXX, of which there are sixteen in the head, including two pulsating veins near the ears called alhasisain; two veins on each temple; two veins on each lacrimal duct of the eyes, known as aspicientz; one vein located in the middle of the forehead; one vein at the tip of the nose; two jugular veins in the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip — these are called algelic; and there are two veins beneath the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	 Based on the pattern you provided, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	 Here's a translation of the given sentence:
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	 The treatment of the veins that are near the ears is for ancient catarrh, headaches, and old sores on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	 And the method of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: it should be done on top of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed in the occipital area where both veins are located with a wide cloth and good friction; then bind the patient's neck tightly with a bandage until the two veins and their locations appear near the ears in two depressed areas of the head; and you will seek that with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, here is the sign.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	 Then you take the lancet knife, and it should be sharp, and then you insert it below the vein in the neck until the phlebotomist reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	 And then raise your hand with the vein and the neck to the separated parts above and make an incision on the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	 And let the length of the incision be about two finger widths or around that; and let out as much blood as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And then strengthen with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	 And already at the beginning of this book, the description and their cauterization have been mentioned.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	 But of the two arterial veins in the temples, the help for phlebotomy is to emigraine, antique and severe headache, obstinate malaria, and acute superfluous outbursts at the temples.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	 And the manner of bleeding those [veins] is as I have advised you: constrain the patient's neck so that both veins are felt clearly by perception, and let their pulse be shown beneath your finger; then you will know with certainty.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 Then lift the blade above the vein to its divided part with your index finger, and insert the flebotomist's incision below, and raise the vein up; and cut it as you have done in the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Then release the constriction of the patient, and place your finger over the vein for an hour, and then place a cloth and poultices over it, strengthening it with a strong bandage, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	 And already the memory of them has been included, and from there the insertion, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	 And thus the venipuncture of the frontal vein is similar to the venipuncture of the cephalic vein in ancient facial diseases, including migraine, fever, and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And the quality of his venipuncture depends on what I tell you; thus, the patient should strengthen his neck with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take the instrument which is called a scoop, and this is its form.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Place the tip of the scoop at the top, which is on the end of the scoop, over that vein and strike it with a hammer or another heavy object in this manner. Allow the blood to flow according to the quantity you desire; then clean the wound of the patient and strengthen it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	 Sometimes it is opened with a wide venipuncture instrument, but it is not necessary for the venipuncture to be as sharp as other venipunctures; instead, let it be dull at the tip, and make that venipuncture transversely because the bone is very close and strong, and a fine venipuncture would break on it.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	 Here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	 And the nature of bloodletting is such that the patient holds their neck with a band, and then you perform the bloodletting on those areas, while standing over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	 And the bloodletting should be done according to the transverse [direction] a little along its length with small incisions, because in this area there is no flesh; and if the incision is subtle, then the end of it will be broken off strongly.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 Then allow the blood to flow as much as is necessary for you, and place cotton over those areas, and hold them tight for one night, and then remove them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	 However, bloodletting from the nasal vein is suitable for treating acute fever and severe headache, as well as facial diseases and migraines that occur on the face, especially when they are chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	 And the method for bloodletting from it is that the patient holds their own neck and then you take their nose with your left hand, take a fine and long lancet, and place it in the middle of the bridge of the nose along its straight line, because the vein does not appear to the touch here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	 Be careful to move your hand with the lancet little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; and then bind it for one night, because this heals easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	 Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence into English:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	 And the quality of that phlebotomy is such that the patient lies face down on their side with a cloth covering them; and let the practitioners be over the head of the patient, while the patient sits on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	 And then proceed to perform phlebotomy on the long vein with a broad fleam little by little; and then extract blood according to temperate quantity or as many times as necessary for that; and then do the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	 And then uncover the cloth and tightly bind both veins so that the patient is not too weakened, and leave until morning when the wound has healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	 And the benefit of phlebotomy of the major veins is to cure small boils and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	 And the quality of that phlebotomy is that you should have the patient sit in front of you, and wrap their neck with a bandage, and then turn their lips inside out and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; the indication of each is by their darkness compared to both, and this is more so because around them are small black veins; and then cut each with a cutting incision.  This final sentence contains a few unusual words, such as "inscicio inscident" which seems to refer to a specific type of incision used for phlebotomy. I've translated it literally as "cutting incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	 If there is any doubt on your part and you don't know which of them it is, then you should proceed with an incision into the larger and more evident of the two.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	 And make sure to mimic both veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	 But it is more common to incise both veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	 But concerning the two veins that are under the tongue, it is appropriate to perform phlebotomy on the cephalic vein at the forearm, for headaches, sore throats, and mouth diseases.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	 And the way to phlebotomize these veins is to make the patient sit between your hands in front of you, raise their tongue, look under the tongue, and on one side of the vein there will be a dark color and on the other side it will also have a dark color.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	 And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to push too hard with your hand when phlebotomizing these, because underneath them are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And the veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those which are customary in all men, and their phlebotomy is done in two ways: either by placing the pointed fleam on the subtly inclined median cubital vein or by using a lancet, and it is called this way.  (Note: "fleam" is an old term for a surgical instrument with a sharp point used to puncture veins for bloodletting)
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	 "And this herb is the one that suits dryness, and of these species are subtle and fine according to the width of the veins and according to the narrowing of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	 "Form of phlebotomy with myrtle:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	 "As often as its leaves, and it is suitable for opening the large, full veins that are clearly visible and contain thick, impure blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	 "And this is the form of phlebotomy with olive:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	 "And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and more subtle in its extremities, and it is suitable for the phlebotomy of subtle veins that contain fine, citrine blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	 "But the help of phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: because it draws blood from illnesses that are beneath the throat and the neck, and from what affects the feet and the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	 "And it is fitting for the phlebotomist, when performing that phlebotomy, to be very careful and cautious with it, because beneath it there is an artery, and if he errs or presses too hard in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood. Therefore, one should not perform this phlebotomy with a pointed phlebotomy instrument before cutting with herbs.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if the vein does not appear clearly, then you should leave that area and move to another, or seek a nearby branch; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm, because that is clearly visible; and afterwards, proceed with phlebotomy similarly as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	 But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the same arm, then touch the area in front of the narrowing of the arm until you feel the pulse, and then mark the spot with ink; and then lift the arm and locate the vein with a concave section [of the lancet], and proceed with phlebotomy similarly as we have said; and be careful not to strike the artery at any point in the area.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	 And when you see, as you tighten the ligature, swelling in the area that you marked with ink, then that swelling is a sign of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	 And if you see the blood flow in phlebotomy like the urine of a child, and the blood is thin and red, then know that it is from the artery; and at that time cut and place your finger over it for a long period; and then remove your finger, and if the blood continues to flow, because it often does, then tighten the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	 And keep an eye on the patient's urine and be concerned about it; do not disturb them for some days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	 But if the blood has not clotted and there is no medicine at hand to deal with this, then you should cut the artery if it appears to you; because the extremity is contracted and the blood has clotted. Or take some lint of fistic, make a poultice with it, and take half of it and strengthen it over the vein with stricture, descent, bandage, and powder until the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	 And then if the blood has clotted, it is good; and if not, then cure it with the water mentioned earlier to help remember the place of clotting blood flow.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	 And the absorption of the blood from him is difficult in many situations due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of the arm being bandaged.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	 But from the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial because it extracts blood from the superior part of the head and the inferior part of the body; this is composed of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	 Here's the translation of the given medieval medical text:
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	 And if the vein is between two nerves, then you split the vein lengthwise.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	 The assistance of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and improves diseases of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	 It is particularly appropriate in this case to use either the olive phlebotomy or myrtle phlebotomy; for it is the safest of all veins, as it does not adjoin an artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	 However, you must ensure that when performing phlebotomy, you do not puncture the end of the lacertus (the tendon of the biceps) alone; instead, seek a softer spot and mark it first by percussive examination to verify its location.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	 However, in some men, it is very easy to cause swelling if the first percussion mark is not used for phlebotomy; but do not mark again on that spot of swelling.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	 However, the quality of this phlebotomy and its outcomes are influenced by certain factors which you should consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	 The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is administered only to preserve health and with the hope of preventing illnesses, and that it should be performed on one of the three veins in the elbow: cephalic, dark, or basilic; and that it should be done at the beginning of spring, before breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter after a meal when signs of fullness appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	 And if bloodletting is done, it should be performed on the third day or before three hours of the first day have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	 But bloodletting that is administered should be done when it causes convenience and necessity for this purpose, either at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	 And it is fitting that an infant not be bled until they are fourteen years old, and a pregnant woman should not be bled except between the fourth and seventh months, and the elderly who have passed sixty years should not be bled.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	 And if someone wishes to be bled in some manner, they should cleanse their intestines before the bloodletting with a clyster of lye, if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw the superfluities from the purulent intestines into the bloodletting of the veins, which are harmful and damaging to the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	 And patients with certainty of nausea or drunkenness should not be bled, nor those who are recovering from illness or inebriation until it has been removed from them, nor hydropic patients. Furthermore, bloodletting should be feared for cases of colic and vomiting, and for bellyache, and for an increase in sexual activity and labor and fasting exercises or vigils, and for any cause that dissolves virtue, whether corporeal or animal. 》
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	 And then carefully consider in subtle detail the quality of the humors before this, if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medications if that is possible for the patient.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	 And then enter a bath if no cause prevents it, or exercise through some physical activity so that the blood may be thinned.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And perform phlebotomy on him at the foot of the day, when it is around the third hour, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	 And ensure that the foot of that patient is guarded on that day from all bad animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily incidents, such as work and unnecessary pain, sex and similar things to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	 And in his room, let there be present the causes of which it is customary for men to use with fragrant ointments and scents, and with balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	 And let the phlebotomist sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	 Then withdraw his arm and have the phlebotomist rub it with their hand two or three times; then tie the bandage tightly with a strap and wrap it around two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	 And if the stricture is treated, because the stricture when it is not equal or the stricture is with superfluity, then you should avoid blood flow; or it is with softening, and then you should prevent the body from emptying the blood.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	 And then the stricture should be treated with bloodletting: the person who needs to be bled should rub his hands together until the veins are swollen and clearly visible to the touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	 And then the bloodletter should anoint his bloodletting instrument with a little proper antiseptic oil; and he should place his left index finger over that vein, below the location where he wants to perform the bloodletting, so that the vein bulges slightly, and the pulse is quieted. For of the veins is the one you find like this when fleeing cords, in which case you should perform the bloodletting. And it is those veins that are full of windiness; when you place the bloodletting instrument over them, they contract, and the bloodletter is discovered; and the bloodletting instrument does not touch the vein, and if it touches, then that one is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	 Therefore, for this reason, the bloodletter must be skilled and attentive to all these factors.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	 Based on the context and the pattern observed in the provided translation, I would interpret the sentence as follows:
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	 And if the area is inflamed or the patient faints, then leave it for a day or two, and do not apply any bandages, because a strong tug will pull out pus, nor enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	 Then proceed with phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	 And if the opening is small and blood flows slowly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out, then perform phlebotomy in that spot again according to correct practice, and adjust the opening slightly. Do this quickly before the area becomes inflamed, because in many cases an inflamed area requires a larger opening.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	 But if you see that it is already inflamed, then do not perform phlebotomy on it again, because it does not allow for any reason to be done so; and place a poultice of olive oil on the area, because this alleviates the body from blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	 And in this case, olive oil is better than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	 Similarly, apply a poultice of olive oil to every phlebotomy wound that you make on the veins, which prohibits bleeding from the body, and prepare terebinth, aloes and sage when one of them is placed over the area, because blood becomes thinner and moves more easily when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	 And if in the place of phlebotomy a large abscess has formed, which often happens and especially to those who have not been bled except this time or during the opening of the vein, then you should cut [the skin] and place on the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly pressed, and hold it there for an hour, because it will dissolve.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	 And it is necessary to do this near the exit of the blood from that vein or another.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	 And if some blackness or greenish color remains in the area for several days, do not worry about it; and if you wish, place on it some paste made of aloe and dissolved myrrh, or some mint juice, or something similar to that.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	 And frequently such abscesses and swellings require phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	 Therefore, place your hand on it, and if you find it to be soft, you should press on it, because that swelling is bad and dangerous; and then take care to place on it some of the substances we have mentioned, for it will flow a lot from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 "And make a plaster with water that has been boiled down to reduce its volume, so that the area becomes hardened, and then continue to care for it with the other treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	 "And it is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the amount of their strength and according to the color that prevails on the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	 "Because if the blood is black, then let it be drained until it becomes red; and similarly if you see that it is thick, then let it be drained until it is made thin; and similarly if it is sharp, then drain it until its sharpness is removed.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	 "And for those who are full and strong and have a need to extract blood in one sitting, the phlebotomy of the vein should be increased, and the phlebotomies should be spaced out.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	 "And for those who are frail, the opposite should be done: it is necessary to extract blood from them in several sittings, and the cut should be small.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	 "And the best method for vein phlebotomy is to make a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	 "And this method of phlebotomy is safe from excessive bleeding and nerve damage, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	 And to which it is customary for syncopation to occur, you must perform phlebotomy, and it is necessary that before the phlebotomy you care for him with a small piece of bread soaked in vinegar of milfoil or simple oxymel; and extract blood from the vein in three or four times.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	 And if it is a cold of the chest, then before phlebotomy take bread soaked in honey syrup of myrrh or honey syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or very fragrant honey syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	 And if syncopation occurs during phlebotomy and it is due to the loss of too much blood, then it is necessary to drink water of meat and very fragrant subtil honey syrup; and use aromatics with rosemary, and anoint your feet with it.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	 And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncope for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	 And if one wants to extend their arm and dissolve their blood gradually, it is necessary for the person from whom phlebotomy is performed for great evacuation, and whose strength is weak, that they extract the blood little by little, according to the quantity of strength in continuous days.  In other words, if the patient is weak, don't take too much blood at once; instead, spread out the phlebotomies over several days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	 "But those who wish to raise their arm, and discharge their blood again, and whose body is strong, should do so approximately seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	 "But those who wish to draw blood from the opposite side of the body compared to where they incline, should be raised on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	 "But in a body where much blood has been cut and it is heated and causes fever, one should discharge the blood in one go and a large quantity should be discharged, and the opening should be enlarged until syncope occurs; because you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy. And place your hand on his pulse, so that he does not die from it instead of fainting, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	 "And it is not advisable when you want to free the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, after the orifice of the vein has already been closed and it becomes difficult for the blood to flow out, that you press hard on the hand with force and stretch it slightly; because this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	 "And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	 "And if necessity compels you to bleed the patient, and there is no excuse not to, then bleed them at that spot or in another vein on the other arm.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	 "And the vein known as 'Funis of the Arm' is blood-let in place of the axillary or basilic veins when they are not found or are hidden, since it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	 "And the quality of his bloodletting is that the patient put their hand in hot water until the needle becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	 "And then he is strengthened on that limb with a moderate bandage; and then bloodletting is performed along the transverse small veins, not broadly nor lengthwise.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	 "And let the opening be wide and your bloodletting with it should be on the joint of the hand, a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	 "And if the blood flow is stopped, then you should immerse the hand in hot water and allow the blood to run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	 If you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from repeating the hand in hot water, and instead the body is placed in hot water during winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	 And this vein's phlebotomy is safer than all the other veins, because after it there are no pulsating veins or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	 And the phlebotomy of the small vein on the right hand is suitable for liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	 And the quality of his phlebotomy is that you strengthen his hand with a bandage or your own hand, after placing it in hot water until the vein becomes swollen and clearly visible; then puncture it transversely. And if you cannot do this for any reason, it will not matter.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	 And be careful not to finish the phlebotomy with your hand, because after that are the nerves of the fingers, which are bare of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	 Then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will clot at the vein's opening, preventing further bleeding.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	 And when the blood has been extracted according to the necessary quantity, then you should place oil and salt on the vein so that it is not hardened immediately; and similarly, you should do this in every narrow branch.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	 But the benefit of phlebotomy from the left arm is that it is suitable for diseases of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	 And do similarly in the phlebotomy from the other side as you have done with the previous one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	 And the benefit of phlebotomy from the saphenous vein is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as uterine diseases and menstrual retention, and for leg and thigh ulcers, both old and new, and similar diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	 And the manner of this phlebotomy is that the patient should put their foot in hot water and rub it until the veins appear; then tie a band around the ankle; and where the vein appears prominently, make incisions with your fingers.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	 And therefore, blood let the largest branch or below the thigh near the heel of the patient, because it is better and safer.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	 And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then you must be careful not to cut the nerves that lie beneath the skin on the surface of the foot. Place your phlebotomy instrument at an angle across the area as if you were cutting it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	 And make sure that your phlebotomies are visible.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	 But if the bleeding is forbidden, then you should immerse the patient's foot in hot water and let the blood flow until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first attempt, then try again with the phlebotomy instrument a little higher up, as the area is salty; and do not fear being clumsy, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	 Do the same for the saphenous vein on the other foot as well.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	 And regarding the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, near the heel beneath the wild plant (likely referring to a specific landmark or anatomical structure).
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	 And the assistance for the phlebotomy of him is at the level of the hip when it is hot with blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	 And the quality of his phlebotomy is that the patient enters a bath, and he should fast and strengthen his thigh from the hip to the heel with four turns in a long, thin bandage, so that it is barely noticeable.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	 And so when it appears, you should perform phlebotomy according to each person's nature and as much as possible along the transverse line, which is better; or you can increase it by incision or dry it out by cautery, because the location of it is hot.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	 And it is often found in many men; and if you find it [the vein], and it doesn't appear throughout the body, then bleed some of its branches, which are those that appear on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	 And be careful with the nerves, and let the blood flow in the amount you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	 Then immediately relieve the constriction and place on the site of the phlebotomy cotton and strengthen the site, for it is lightly healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	 About cupping and the qualities to use them.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	 Cupping glasses are made of horn, or glass, or crystal.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	 And cupping is done in two ways: one is with scarification and bloodletting, and the other is cupping without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	 And this cupping that is without scarification is done in two ways: either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	 And in the places where cups are applied with scarification and bloodletting, there are fourteen places on the body: one of which is called alnocrati, and it is the last part of the head; and the middle place of the two parts of the neck together; and cups under the chin below the jawbone below the mouth; and cups of the two spatulas; and cups of the alohoster, which are over the end of the ribs; and cups of the two fingers, and they are on the two arms; and cups of the two ankles; and cups of the two groins.  (Note: The translation is a bit uncertain, especially with the last few phrases.)
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	 And bloodletting should not be performed except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by doing so, the virtue is not lost as it is in phlebotomy; nor is it necessary to perform bloodletting with fire or without fire in any disease caused by plethora until the entire body has been evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	 But if necessity requires bloodletting due to illness or habit, administer it at the beginning of the month, in the middle, and at the end, and at any other time as needed.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	 The causes of which are that in men there is an excess of blood, such that they need to have it extracted by bloodletting and find heaviness and sluggishness in their head; and from these people, repletion and redness appear on their face and head, and on their neck; and from these people, pallor appears on their face and forehead, and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and from those who expel blood from the usual site of bloodletting; and from those whose laughter is increased; and from those who taste blood in their mouth, or whose tongue is thickened and they spit out blood; and from those whose sleep is increased, and from those who see blood, redness, and other similar signs during sleep.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	 And therefore, when you see one of those causes, and especially if it occurs in the third or middle of the month, it is commanded that bloodletting be done because two or three hours have passed during the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	 And for the benefit of bloodletting from the neck is that when you apply it to the head, it brings relief to what is heavy in the head and settles in the temples; but it is better that this be an evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	 And this bloodletting is in the location of phlebotomy of the cephalic [vein].
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	 And it is not advisable to use this on someone who has a complete chill or who has a cold, because it can cause great harm to them.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	 And for this reason, it is not advisable to use this on the elderly, and especially those whose heads are afflicted with cold.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	 But to those who are continuous with this, forgetfulness is done to them; and therefore it is necessary for you to command the bloodletter to pause his hand slightly on the lancet below, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	 But bloodletting from the elbow is in the location of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilic [vein]: and with this you bring relief to asthma, and to the constriction of breath, and to the cutting of the instrument of breath, and to cough, and to fullness. 
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	 And it is necessary that the wound be uncovered a little, because if it is covered up, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	 And apply cupping to the back of the head for headaches, blindness, migraines, epilepsy, and toothache; it is an alternative to bloodletting at the vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	 And you should instruct the cupper not to press his hand with scarification, lest he cut the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	 And cupping at the chin is applied for hiccoughs in the mouth, for corrupt gums, and for similar ailments that are in the mouth; it is an alternative to bloodletting of the veins on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	 But cupping that is done over both temples is applied for heatstroke, which is caused by an excess of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	 And cupping at the two parts within the eyebrows is equivalent to bloodletting of three veins: the basilica, fusca and cephalic, because it attracts blood from all small veins in the flesh and small veins of other larger veins until attraction reaches the three main veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	 The text is likely written in a medieval Romance language, possibly a form of Old Occitan or Catalan given its similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here’s the translation:
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	 And it is a cupping glass with which one cups over the buttocks and treats the hemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcerous sores located thereafter.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	 And command the cupping therapist to use a large cupping glass, made of iron, because the area requires strong heat; and make sure that the cups are very fine and that they have been scarified with a scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	 However, smaller cups on the thighs are more effective in drawing blood from the whole body, and they help with old pains in the hips, back, and bladder; they also stimulate menstruation, helping with melancholy and sadness; they serve as an alternative to bleeding two veins, the jugular, and the two saphenous veins.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	 However, they greatly weaken the entire body and cause syncope in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	 And regarding the recovery from cupping, it is similar to the recovery from cupping on both thighs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	 And the quality of the cup position is that you place the cup initially empty and draw blood slowly, not prolonging the position of the cups but rather placing them gently and leaving them in place for a while until the fluids come to the surface gradually.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	 And do not stop doing this and continue until you see the area turn red, swell up, and the appearance of blood.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	 And then you should make an incision and continue to draw out a little bit at a time, and also take into account the condition of the patient's body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	 Because a man who has tender and delicate skin should only be incised once, not more, to avoid the area becoming ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	 And instruct the cupping practitioner to widen the incision and prick a little, and then suck out with ease. ️
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	 And if the blood is thick, then you should incise twice, because in the first incision, the pathway for the blood and its wateriness is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	 But in the second [incision], to achieve thorough drainage of the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	 And if the blood is very dark, then a third incision should be made so that you can obtain the last [remaining blood].
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	 And finally, when we want to draw out the blood little by little or just a small amount, one incision is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	 And if we want to draw out a lot of blood, we incise with many incisions; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to incise with a deep incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	 And the term for making an incision is only as deep as the thickness of a cord.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	 And if the cord is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the places for cupping be anointed with gentle, open, resolving oils; in summer, such as oil of aloe or oil of violets, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of sesame seeds from Cajun; and in winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or oil of sanicle, and similar oils.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	 And if the excess is thick and rough, then let the oil be amaranth, or oil of basil, or oil of aloe, or oil of dill, and similar oils.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	 But if the person receiving cupping has large pores and soft skin, then it is necessary that they be prohibited from oil, and it is necessary that for them, before cupping, the places of cupping be washed with rose water or with harsh water of solatrum, or with water of Cajun, or with water of borage, and similar waters to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	 And that of which blood is very moist, wash its openings with vinegar or with water of myrtle and sumac, similar to those (methods).
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	 And of that from which the superfluities are large, wash its openings with old vinegar or with water of hyssop, which is majorana, or with a decoction of dill, or chamomile, and similar to those (methods).
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	 And it is advisable that the opening be protected before bathing; afterwards, it should be administered soon after the bath for one hour or two, and it is advisable to sleep near the opening.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	 What must be done to prepare a patient for bloodletting before cupping therapy?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	 It is advisable to consider at the beginning: if the person who will be cupped or bled is choleric and has hot and inflamed blood, then they should take cooling remedies such as tart apples, sorrel in vinegar, endive in vinegar, lettuce, cucumber, syrup of roses, and similar substances.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	 And let their food be such as polenta, and meats of roasted birds, and foods seasoned with sour things, and the like.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	 And for those whose condition is severe, it is necessary that they drink aniseed syrup or aniseed syrup from seeds, and sumac, and half a handful of scented mint between meal times; and it should be recommended to them to use only a small amount of food and drink, and to avoid dishes such as poultry, cannabis, peas, small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	 And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and phlebotomy, the drink should be greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	 And it is necessary that some men are given in drink at certain hours before bloodletting or phlebotomy, theriac alpharac or musk medicine, which is nutmeg or mace, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is refined; and they should not take this potion.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	 But the bloodletting that is without incision should be done on the liver, and above the spleen and gout, and above the navel, in the places of the kidneys, and the bladder of the anus, because these members do not tolerate incision on them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	 And it is not used for this reason alone, but also to draw blood from the member, just as a cupping glass is placed on the breast in the illness of bleeding of the nose; and it is used so that the thick viscous windiness of the member is dissolved, just as a cupping glass is placed on the belly and navel; because this rarefies the member and softens it, relieving pain by resolving windiness.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	 And already placed on the ribs when it occurs in their inflammation or abscess, because by virtue of attraction, it quickly relieves inflammation and eradicates the abscess from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	 And similarly, it does when placed on the liver and spleen to alleviate swelling in those organs.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	 And these cupping therapies are administered only with suction; and some times they are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	 And sometimes they are administered filled with warm water in cases of liver disease.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	 And this is because the cup must be filled and be large, whether it is hot water alone or water in which appropriate herbs have been steeped.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	 The form of the cupping therapy administered with fire: the width of the orifice should be two fingers, as we have formed it; and the amount of air within should be half a palm's length; and on the patient's back, in the place where the veins are visible, it should be half the size, with the hole being small enough to insert a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	 It should be made of red copper or citrine, with thick edges, smooth and polished, so that it does not irritate the member due to its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	 "And place a candle with fire in the middle of an iron or bronze crossbeam, which is positioned above.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	 "And let this cupping glass be larger than the one we previously described, and the smaller one accordingly less based on the condition of the patient using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	 "And the cupping glasses for infants and weak individuals are different from those for the young and robust people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	 "And the method for placing this cupping glass with fire on a limb is to spread the cloth with decent firewood in front of a small candle made of wax, and place it in the middle of the crossbeam where the glass will be placed, so that the fire is ignited around the base to prevent the patient's body from being burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	 "Then place it on the patient's limb and cover it with the cloth as we have said, until when you have the cupping glasses and do not need to remove the cloth and let the vapor rise over that spot, then the glass will immediately be removed.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	 "And next, ignite the cloth according to its method, and repeat this if you need more of it.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	 "But in the case of a cupping glass used for pleurisy, with water, there is no crossbeam or hole, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed only on the limb.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	 And this is its form: The larger this container is, the better it is, because it can hold a greater quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	 Chapter XCVII.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	 Sanguijuelas are not applied to all members, but only to those in which it is not possible to place ventouses, due to the smallness of these, such as the foot and gums and their similar parts; or on a member devoid of flesh, such as the teeth and nose and their similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	 And the quality of using those that you find is to use bloodsuckers that are in clean, still waters.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	 And then they should be placed day and night in still water until they are sluggish, and that there is no cause left in their belly; and then the body should be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and with ventouses; and then the member of the patient should be rubbed until it reddens; and then they should be placed on him.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	 And when they are filled and fall off.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	 And if it is possible to suck the place with a ventouse, it is more appropriate for healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	 And if not, then wash the place with vinegar and then with warm water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	 And if the blood is excessive, then sprinkle on it powdered vitriol or similar astringent substances until the bleeding stops; or place cooked fava beans on the area and let them sit until they stick to the spot, at which point the bleeding should stop.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	 And it is also necessary, when possible, to change those leeches.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	 And if leeches are not available, then the area should be wiped with fresh blood or a needle should be inserted into the spot until it bleeds; and then they should be placed there, for those that sense any blood will quickly adhere.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	 And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle a little powdered aloe, or salt, or ash on them, and they will quickly fall off.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	 Thus begins the chapter of the third section: Restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	 This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the restoration of broken bones and dislocated joints.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	 Oh son, be aware that fools and the common people boast about this chapter, as well as those who at any time did not respect the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	 And for this reason it is done that this method of the wise ones in our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten it at any time; and I have not added anything else to it, except after a long study of the books of the Ancients and reflection on their meaning, until I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	 And accordingly I directed my attention to experimentation and study throughout my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	 And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my experiment has passed; since I have abbreviated it for you others and delivered you from the labor of prolixity; and I have abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and I have formed in it many forms of the instruments that are used in it, as is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	 Chapter one.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	 Summary and collection of the causes of bone fractures, from which a necessary preface is required before we begin to recall the members fractured in various ways, each one by one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	 Therefore, in the preface of this chapter we will state the main points of the subject matter; and the chapters that at the beginning require the masters to be stationed on the truth of these; thus it is with you and those who are quick to learn or teach this noble art, others of you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	 Based on the pattern of the provided translations, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	 And then he should be content with food that is light and consists of green herbs, birds, and crabs; avoid heavy meats and filling oneself with food that clogs the veins with blood, until you are sure it is free from abscess, and if not, watch for matter leaving the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	 And then return the patient to his original diet which he was accustomed to before.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	 And when the broken bone begins to heal, then it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods that are abundant and heavy in viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat with water, rice, meat, heads, feet, stomachs of cows, sheep, fresh fish, fatty meats and similar ones. And with this diet the fracture is healed more easily and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	 And know that broken bones in men who are very old and weak cannot be continued and healed according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	 And they are always continued and healed according to their nature due to the dryness of those limbs, and those that are at the end of their tenderness are also continued and healed, such as the bones of small children. 	
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And for this reason, it is necessary to remove the food from the patient, food that contains heaviness, stickiness, and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	 Fractures vary according to the different parts of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	 And you should know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly, all other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	 I will now recall every type of fracture, presented in its own chapter, separate from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	 Additionally, there is diversity within each type of fracture itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	 And the types of bone fractures are further divided within themselves; for there is the arch-shaped fracture which occurs when stars fall upon it; and sometimes a fracture is made according to the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the shaft, splinters, and protrusions, whether they protrude or not, as is done in the pen when preparing to write, and there is a fracture with bruising and tearing in the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	 This text appears to describe a medical procedure or treatment for a patient. Here's the translation line by line:
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	 Motu signum fracturae ossis.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	 And by this it is known to be a bone fracture: it is twisted and swollen, with a bump and sensitivity when touched or pressed by your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	 And therefore if there is no visible swelling or sensitivity when you touch the bone with a slight shake and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	 It is possible that it is just swelling or a small crack, so you should not move the affected area with your hand and apply pressure; place upon it medicines suitable for the moment, such as those that bind well; and then tie tightly with fine bandages.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	 And know that if the area is bent and not split in two or anything else happens to it, like a wound, when all its parts are moved from their place, then you should start at once with the straightening of it, having a poultice applied to it first.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	 And if a suppurating poultice is applied to it, then leave it for some days until the suppuration ceases; and then wrap it in any manner you can with lightness and skill.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	 And know that restoring and bloodletting him is easier than for bones in which this happens.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	 Then strengthen the second one, as remembering him will come later.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	 But if the bones are fractured, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb, whether it is the hand or foot; use your hands for a small limb, or two ropes for a large one, or one rope and a hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	 And let your position be such that you place the limb in its natural form, while the broken parts of the fractured limb are extended, and then you will make those additions return to their places with cunning and as best as possible for each part.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	 And be careful according to your strength that nothing happens to the patient due to your operation, neither pain nor injury; and do your best to align one bone with its companion in the best way possible.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	 And it is necessary that at that time you touch with your hand and if you find any different cause here, correct it and align it according to the amount of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	 And avoid excessive stretching and compression, as many foolish doctors do, who with their many observations cause pus to form due to their operation, or cause contracture in the limb, as we have seen this happen through their many observations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	 And then you should attach a splint, making sure it is aligned properly and securely in place for the member; advise the patient on this matter and make them understand that they should not move or disturb it during their waking hours or sleep, and observe its position and movement, and control all its movements with all your skill; and watch to see if the position of the member is such that the pain is assured; for when one feels pain or injury in the disposition of the member's position, then it is necessary to change it to another position where there is no pain; and be careful that this position is straight and equal, so that the member does not become deformed when it is healed.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	 And the quality of the splint for a calmed member is what I recommend; know that broken members are varied in their smallness and largeness and in their form.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	 And for those that are small, such as the arm and finger and toe, it is necessary that the wrapping be of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	 But for those that are large, such as the thigh or shin, it is necessary that there be a thick and hard wrapping, for the thick and hard wrapping holds together the large member and strengthens it from all sides with an equal splint, so that no bruise enters into it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	 And then begin, during your evacuation of excrement, to place suitable bandages on that broken area with three or four wraps depending on the size of the limb; and strengthen your hand a little with the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	 And then come to that place on the upper part of the broken area, and strengthen less than when you make the stricture with which you have strengthened the broken area.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	 And then extend yourself with an additional wrap on the broken area, and gradually loosen the stricture until you have taken a large part from the broken area.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	 And then take another bandage and wrap it again on the broken area, and then come to the lower part of the fracture; and let your operation be in the stricture of the bandage and in the loosening thereof according as we have said in the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	 And then place between the wraps of linen or cloth with which is covered the twist of the fracture, if there is a twist in it; and if not, do not put anything in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	 And then place another bandage on top, and then cover these wraps with a decent-sized cloth immediately, if there is no swelling or abscess on the area, and then place on it whatever cures the abscess and removes the swelling; and leave that for several days; and then strengthen over it with the cloths.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	 And let the sticks of the bed frame be made from sturdy cane or well-formed reed, or they may be made from pine wood; or from palm ribs. And let each stick be as wide as this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	 And it is necessary that the stick placed over the fracture be a little thicker and sturdier than the other sticks, and the length of the stick according to the size of the limb, both large and small. Then strengthen the sticks with another bandage according to your initial wrapping, and then bind it securely with a decent strap as we have mentioned for the binding, so that the binding is tighter near the fracture, and the further it is from the fracture, the looser the binding should be.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	 It is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and they should be made from silk. And if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operations of some foolish people who use their threads from twisted ropes, it is a great mistake, because when the binding is too tight, it can cause equal damage.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	 And likewise, very fine threads are not suitable, because you will not achieve with them what you want through binding, and it is not necessary that there be less than one finger's width between stick and stick.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	 And if the patient is bitten by the ends of the stars near the constriction in these places, then place under that some thick cloth or wool blanket until it does not cause harm to him.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	 Sometimes a fracture is with a wound, and there is a rupture in the cord, and I will come to remember that in the chapter according to its specific case.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	 And know that not every broken limb is bound with bandages on the first day; the reason for this is that if the limb is large, it should not be covered with bandages immediately but rather after about five days or seven or more, according to your caution of the possible formation of pus.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	 And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients restored [bones], which were placed on fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	 The method of plaster as described for the restoration of fractures is suitable for many complex cases and especially for women and children, because it does not require heat or cold: you should take flour dust, which is the soft part of the flour that sticks to the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	 And make it thus as it is, except that you sieve it with egg white, and the composition of it should not be too thick nor too thin; and then use this [plaster].
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	 Certainly! Here's the translation of the given text into English:
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	 Sure, let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	 This is a translation of a medical text from the Middle Ages in Old Occitan. The sentence means: "Everything is ground to dust in a mortar with great care and then sieved, and mixed with water or egg white and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	 "Method for plastering joints and bones separated from their places, where pain occurs in these areas, as well as cracks and fractures: take clean wool and soak it in vinegar and hot oil, then place it on the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	 "However, this plaster does not have the virtue of restoration, but rather cauterizes and expels pain specifically.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	 "Another method for a plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of wild fig tree and poppy, grind them all together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	 "Method for a short plaster administered to promote bone healing and resolution of remaining infection: take roots of mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, barley flour, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix with vinegar, if the member is not cut.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	 "But if it is cut, then mix that plaster with water from cooked chicory leaves or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	 Based on the provided context and the similarity to medieval medical texts in various Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	 Based on the given context and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	 And if a severe pain or swelling or inflammation occurs in that place, then you should cut or dissolve it immediately and remove the plaster from there.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	 And take a cloth of linen and marine sponge soaked in warm water, and immerse it in tepid water, and with it wash the place until the swelling ceases and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour; then place on it wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rosemary oil, and bind it onto it for a night until you are sure of a cautious abscess, and that the inflammation of the member subsides, and the pain is alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then repeat that gentle and small bandage, and do not tighten it with your first constriction, and refine it until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	 And if you see that the abscess and redness and pain and inflammation and all the accidents have already subsided completely, and you desire bandages and constrictions, then repeat it in the same way as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	 And if no cause of those that we have mentioned occurs in the member, then do not dissolve it but rather wait three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to what appears to you by the dissolution of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh on that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	 And then adjust the constriction more than you did in your previous stricture, and adjust according to the thickness of the patient's food, as was mentioned before.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	 But if you see that the place of the fracture has dried out and atrophied more than it should, then you know that the nourishment is not reaching there; therefore, soak that part in lukewarm water every time you leave it; and this should be done for three days. Then slightly reduce the constriction, and through this operation, the nourishment will reach the member, and it will heal easily.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	 But what fools do when they try to reset a fractured limb at another time after it has not been properly set at the beginning, according to what is needed, and if it is set incorrectly, is an error in their operation and a great danger. And if this were done correctly, as the ancients have written in their books and have operated with.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	 And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it seems more reasonable that it should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	 Chapter Two: When a fracture occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	 There are many types of fractures, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures are caused by the blow of a weapon, and the blow breaks all the bone into pieces, which remain under the skin, just as happens with a stick, and for this reason this type is called comminution; or the weapon cuts off some part of the bone and cuts the flesh without reaching to the other side; and this type of fracture is called absolute amputation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	 And this wound from these two fractures is either great or small, and the fracture is either concave or convex; and its cause is impact with a club or falling on rock, and their appearances.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	 And this fracture is either penetrating, reaching the flesh beneath the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone, and the wound from these two fractures is either great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	 And this fracture is such that it is confined within the bone, in the fineness of the small hair, and for this reason, this type of fracture is called a "hairline" fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	 And this is a fracture that is caused either by falling or by the impact of a rock, which makes some layer of the bone enter into the divided parts inside, and it happens in a concave place, just like what occurs to earthenware pots when they are struck and their entrance is divided into the inside parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	 And this happens most often in the bones of children, such as in their heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	 And to all these kinds of fractures, they are bad just like separate stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	 And I will return with a reminder of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	 Sure, let's break down and translate this sentence:
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	 And a type of herb is known by the fact that it is revealed on the bone, and it is washed, and anointed on it with oil, because the break appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	 But in the treatment of fractures, consider first the accidents of the patient, and if you see by the signs that it indicates fear by manifest sign, such as vomiting from anger, extension, loss of consciousness, lack of voice, fainting, acute fever, exudation of the eyes and heat of them, and similar signs in major dispositions, without doubt it will not heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	 And if you see non-serious accidents, you hope for health; then you begin the treatment of him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	 The cause is that if the patient has been affected at the beginning as he was affected and this is in the winter days, then you should study the setting of the bone before the fourteenth day according to every disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	 And if it is in the summer days, then you should try to set the bone before the seventh day, having that which remains of the bone be corrupted by the flesh, and that the accidents which we have mentioned occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	 And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain and is with small divisions and attrition, then it is necessary to incise the divided and attrited partition as I will recommend to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	 And it is that you shave the patient's head where the wound is, and uncover the bone according to custom and manner as possible for you according to the shape of the wound, and be gentle on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	 And if you notice the detection of bone fragments, blood flow or pus, then you should cover it with what is necessary, and that is to fill the area with cloth soaked in wine and oil, and make the wound rest until the pus subsides, and you are sure there is no bleeding; and then begin with the cutting around the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	 And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And one method is that you incise the bone with a narrow chisel like this, and this is its form: And then administer another chisel like this, a little wider than the first; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	 And then use the widest chisel of the three.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	 And it is necessary that you have a variety of scissors, some longer than others; and some shorter than the others, with their tips being sharp, and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	 And use them with ease when pressing on the scissors so that you do not cut the tip and hurt yourself.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	 And if the bone is hard and strong, then it is necessary to drill a hole around it before you use the scissors with the drills, which are called non-penetrating drills.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	 And they are not called that because those do not reach the end of the bone towards what is near it, but because the drill has a round tip or edge at its end that is sharp like a small margin or circle, which prevents it from penetrating and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	 And it is convenient that you take of these drills a large number of which each one is suitable for the thickness of each bone, until you have all the bones of the skull with sharp tips, and the length and width are according to the thickness of this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	 And this is the method for three types of drills: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the drill on the bone and rotate it with your hands until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then move the drill to another location, and place it so that it traverses the entire thickness of the bone or its surroundings.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	 And then you should cut with scissors between each interstice of the bone, and make that pus as subtle as possible over this, in order to extract the bone, either with your hand or with some other cause through certain instruments which you will have prepared for this purpose, such as tweezers and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	 And it is important that you take every precaution to ensure that the surgeon does not touch any of the patient's intimate parts.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	 And then, when you have bored through the bone and if it is attached to the flesh, you must remove it carefully with a sharp instrument similar to a scalpel, but more delicate and finer than other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	 And if there are any small and splintered pieces of bone remaining, take them out with ease using the instruments you have at hand; then heal the wound with dressings and ointments as we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And another method of operation is gentle and far from fear, which Galen speaks of and praises greatly; and his words are as follows: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin uncovering the broken part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and obvious. Once you have discovered that part and placed underneath it the point of a slow and gentle scalpel, of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	 And the lenticular part should be sharp and not cut any tissue, while the pointed part should extend two fingers' width from the bone, as you see; so that the lenticular part fits closely to the flesh with its sharp edge against the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	 And then strike the incision on one side with a small hammer until all the bones are cut through easily as it revolves, and make sure that no harm comes to the fat tissue, and if the doctor were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their trade; certainly, even if they were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	 Then if any cause is attached to the bones of the fat tissue in some places of the bone, cut it out with the pointed end of the incision tool, and deliver it from the tissue easily, because it can be delivered without harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	 And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the fat tissue, and what is cut or removed from the bone is its surface, and roughness and fine splinters remain, then it is necessary to scrape away that roughness and remove those splinters with sharp razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can administer them in the most convenient and correct places according to where your operation takes place on that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	 And you must administer with your razor which you use to scrape the bones at the beginning, using the largest of those razors first, and then gradually move to the smaller ones, and do not stop doing this until you have administered the thickest and smallest of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	 In each of the other small or subtle fractures, it is necessary that you administer care according to what has been lost for its correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	 And it is not appropriate over all those who have studied in this art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	 And what we have written about in major fractures, we have shown here.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	 And if the skin is removed when you remove the bone, then take a cloth according to the size of the wound and soak it in hot oil, and place it on the opening of the wound; and then take another cloth, folded or tripled, and soak it in wine and hot oil and place it on the first cloth and do this as lightly as you can on that, so that you do not press the flesh; and then administer to it a linen bandage, and do not bind it too tightly but only according to the size of the wound alone.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	 And leave it with this care for one day or two until you are sure that the abscess has cauterized; and then unbind it and then administer medicines with which there is an excess of dryness, such as linseed oil and powder of lentils and of peas and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	 Certainly! Let's translate the provided text line by line into English:
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	 And be careful according to your skill that the wound in your care is clean; and there should not be any stupidity of ointment or other substances; nor should you allow virulence to increase in it; for when it is placed on the tissue of the brain, it corrupts that and poisons it, and something evil and malignant happens to the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	 And it happens in the cavity of the head, especially when the bone is exposed and when its care has been neglected, and there is blackness on its surface; and therefore consider if such accidents happen to the patient, you should know that it is deadly without any doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 And if there is no blackness except from the medicine that is placed on it, and it is due to the power of that medicine that it causes this blackness, then you should take some honey and three parts of refined oil, and with these you should line a cloth, and then place it over the cavity; and then treat it with healing spices until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	 Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	 On the restoration of the nose when it is cut off.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	 Know that the nose is not cut off except in two parts at once, or one of those parts being injured, because it has two bones, and the lower part is cartilaginous, and it is not cut but rather crushed and twisted and bent.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	 And let this be done by you with ease, and take care that it does not fall upon the suffering patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	 And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and the nose does not reach that point, then it should be cut with the tip of a small needle.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	 And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should proceed similarly.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	 And be mindful of the patient's recovery on the first day after the fracture, if possible; and if not, then you should wait for seven or ten days to allow for the resolution of the swelling.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	 And then insert the tip of a linen cloth into the nostril, if the fracture is in one part; or place two wicks, if the fracture is in two parts, and let it be in the larger wick of such quantity that it fills the hole in the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	 And some of the ancient restorers say that the wicks should be wrapped in wool and changed every day, but I have not seen this; however, it is necessary that the wick should be wrapped in egg white mixed with powdered almonds; and then leave the wick until the bone is solidified and the cartilage is hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	 And sometimes it may be necessary to intervene in the nose, in a place called the cavity, with an awl wrapped in linen cloth; and if the patient already has a severe nasal fracture and is not forbidden from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	 And this action is not necessary for you; if you wish, do it, or if you wish, make an incision.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	 And if at another time an abscess occurs, apply a plaster to the nose with cerate or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	 But if an abscess does not occur, then you should plaster the outside of it with sesame flour and powdered iris, mixed with egg white; and then place a linen bandage over it, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	 But if the bones of the nose are broken or crushed with a small fracture, then it is necessary to cut over those areas and remove them with instruments that are appropriate for them; and then close the incision, and care for it with something that promotes healing and consolidation, and with appropriate plasters.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	 And if a wound occurs inside the nose, then it is necessary to treat it with incisions and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	 This appears to be a chapter heading or section title in your medieval medical treatise. The phrase "Capitol .iiii." likely means "Chapter IV" or "Section 4".
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	 About the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	 When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not painful, then consider if the fracture is only on the outside, and it is not broken into two parts but curved at the joints inside, in that case, its condition is light.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	 Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then insert the said index finger of the right hand; and push with that the swelling of the inside fracture towards the outside parts with ease, with your other hand on the outside part of the bone; and thus you straighten it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	 And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer traction of both parts according to their straightness until it becomes possible to align them.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	 And if there is disruption of the teeth due to the shock, then strengthen those that you hope will remain with gold or silver wire or silk thread; and then place wax on the broken jawbone, and place a double cloth over it, and place a large well-made cloth or a sole of felt equal to the length of the jaw; and then tie it above in such a way that the tying is suitable for the application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	 And order the patient to rest and be calm, and restrict his food intake to small portions.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	 And if you believe that the shape has already changed in any way, then take care of it and release it on the third day; and then correct what has been altered from him and plaster it with powdered mill, with egg white, or with sesame flour, after you have removed the wax from him, and place clean wool over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	 Then, when that plaster is well attached and the position of the bone has not changed, leave it in place, do not remove it until it heals and strengthens the fracture; for many times this fracture is healed in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	 And if another time an abscess forms, then administer what we have said many times for his sedation until it is healed and the abscess has been removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	 And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider whether it is separated pieces of bone or splinters; then you should be careful to remove those splinters with what is appropriate for removing those from the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with the fleam according to the amount of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	 And then, when you have removed those stitches and nothing comes out of them, then you should enlarge the orifice of the wound if it is wide; otherwise, place on it one of the plasters suitable for this purpose and let it encrust until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	 Chapter 5
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	 On the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	 Often, the collarbone is broken from the anterior side due to a muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	 Because it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts without stitches occurring; and its restoration is easy; or it happens that stitches occur in it, and its restoration is difficult; or it is such that the fracture is with a wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	 And the operation for this [case] is that when the fracture is without a wound, you should have two assistants present, so that one holds the broken collarbone and follows its movement, while the other extends the neck towards that side.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	 Then align the fracture with your hands until it has taken on its proper form and there is neither a prominent edge nor a concavity present.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	 And if you need more extension, then place a small pillow or wool pad under the patient's neck, and let its size be according to your necessity; extend and raise the chin and shorten the pad with your hand until it matches the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	 And if you cannot pull the chin outwards to its original position because it has reached the chest, then it is necessary that the patient be laid on their back with a pillow of moderate size placed under their neck muscles.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	 And the assistant presses on the patient's neck muscles towards the sides until the bone of the chin is raised and positioned correctly in the chest, at which point you should realign the fracture and secure it with your instructions.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	 But if you feel splinters of the chin bone and they are sharp, then it is necessary to cut over them and extract those splinters with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if it is lodged in the bone, then you should invent an incision with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, since you had placed under the chin the tool that serves to extract; and this tool is made of wood or iron, and its form is as follows:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	 And it is similar to the cavity of which this is the concave part; and its size should be according to what you need from it, depending on the largeness or smallness of the bone.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	 But its length should be according to what is possible for the operation; it should have two ends like this, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	 And if the opening of the wound that you have cut when extracting the splinter from the bone is wide, and you are sure to avoid pus, then you sew together the two lips of the wound with a stitch.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	 And if the opening is small, or you fear that pus will form, then fill the wound with cloth and wool according to the size of the incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	 And if an inflamed pus forms, then infuse cloth in vinegar, oil, and wine, and place it on top of the wound.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	 However, the constriction of the bone when there is no wound or cut, you should place a plaster made from ground flour and egg white on it, and then place a thin leather stopper over it. Then take a strip that has been used by the Saracens, which is very long and about the width of one palm; then place double layers of wool over the stopper and the plaster; then take a thin board of similar length and wrap it in cloth, and then wrap that cloth with the board around the fracture site. Then bind it as if you are bandaging a wound, and roll it up from his neck down to his groin, covering all parts. And when the constriction of the fracture descends due to its own constriction, it is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	 And ensure that the splint is not too tightly placed on the broken bone; therefore, you must check the patient every day, because when the bandage becomes soft or the splint starts to slip, then you should adjust it and tighten the bandage again.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	 And now place the patient's pillow under their neck, and put a small cushion under their head at night; this way, the helper beside them will have an easier time raising their arm from that side, and thus the fracture of the clavicle is elevated with the muscle; or tie the patient's arm to their neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	 And do not remove the bandage unless you notice in that place more prominence or abscess within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	 And promptly renew the bandage if you see it turning red, and adjust in the constriction and restore it, leaving until the fracture of the clavicle is restored and healed.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	 And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the month in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it is done in a few months of that time.
Capitol .vi.	 Chapter VI
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	 On the healing of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	 The text appears to describe a medical procedure involving the use of a tool called a "spatula." Here's a line-by-line translation into English:
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	 And so when the site of the break — and it is broken in the middle part of the body — and is only known by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, forcefully prepare him and reduce it according to the natural form in every manner of skill that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	 Then place on the site powder of crushed eggshells mixed with oil and let it sit; then place a double-layered cloth pad; then place on him a thin wooden board according to the size of the spatula, either entirely or slightly more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	 But if the board is concave in some of the places of the splint, then you fill that concavity with a pad, and then place the board again according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	 Then strengthen on top with a long bandage, binding it tightly and firmly securing the board so that it is not moved from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	 And examine the bandage every day; and each time that it is softened, bind another layer and strengthen and straighten the board if it has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	 And lie the patient on his side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	 And the splint is restored in 20 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	 And therefore, when this number is completed, you should dissolve the bandage, knowing that it is safe because this belongs to the bones whose beginning and dissolution are not feared.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	 And if you proceed from the place of the bone pressing and put a rope underneath it, then you should cut over it, remove it, and act according to what we have said regarding the fracture of the furcula, taking care to avoid an abscess if it occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	 ### Chapter VII
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	 On the restoration of a foot fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	 The foot sometimes breaks in the middle and this delays; but its ends move because they are splintered and fragmented.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	 And the consequences of this when it breaks in the middle are that it declines into the inner parts and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, severe fever, and vomiting blood; and it is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation. мени
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	 And its restoration is achieved by having the patient lie on their back and placing a cushion between their shoulders; then press the muscles together and align the ribs with the hands of two assistants; be skillful in your operation and in the alignment according to all possible ways that are convenient for this, until the bone returns to its proper shape.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	 Based on the pattern of the previous translation and my understanding of similar languages, here's a line-by-line translation:
Capitol .viii.	 "Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	 "About the restoration of ribs when they are dislocated.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	 "Know that fractures of the ribs do not occur except in large areas near the back; and at their ends towards the front, this condition does not happen except because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	 "And the recognition of it is not hidden from feeling, you must inquire about it with words.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	 "And the restoration should be done so that you align the fracture with words according to the possible method, until it is absorbed as needed, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bones with a splint, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	 "And if the fracture of the ribs is leaning towards the inner parts, then severe pain and stabbing occur for the patient, like the stabbing that occurs in those with pleurisy, and this happens because the bone pierces the membrane; and difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting of much blood occur; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	 "And already the ancient physicians have described it with ingenious words.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	 "And they said: it is necessary to place food for the patient that causes flatulence and bloating, so that the belly is swollen and extended, and the fracture is pushed outwards towards the outer parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	 But we would have done this to prevent the light cause of forming an abscess, if it does not happen; and if it already happens, then it helps in this situation.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	 And some of them say that it should be placed on top of the bladder and squeezed with force; and this seems reasonable, but there is fear that the bladder will attract excess fluids to the area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	 And some of them say: it is necessary that the area be covered with wool already soaked in cautious oil, and cushions should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the bandage is equal when you wrap it according to its roundness; and then the patient should be treated with a poultice of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	 And if the patient experiences intense constriction that they cannot tolerate, and the bones are striking the membrane with a puncture, then it is feared for the patient. In this case, we must cut open the area, expose the broken rib, and place an instrument over it to preserve the breath, as mentioned before. Then, we should gently incise the bone and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	 And then we should join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, and treat it with dressings until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	 And if an abscess occurs internally, then you should take and pour powder into rose oil and place it on the area, and the patient should be treated with water appropriate for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	 And let him be placed on his back on the bed where he sleeps, until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	 Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	 On the restoration of a spine fracture in the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	 Sometimes there is a fracture in the bones of the neck, and later it extends to their cartilage, similarly with the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	 And if this happens to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider this: if you see that his hands are already softened and numbed and dead, and he cannot move those nor extend nor strengthen them, and when you squeeze those with your fingers or prick them with a needle and he does not feel pain in those, then know that it is not healing, and in the same way it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	 And if he moves those and feels constriction with the fingers and pricking, then know that the bone of the neck is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	 If you see that the vertebrae of the neck appear like this and you want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	 Then if you see that they are already softened, do to them what has happened in the hands, and then when he lies on his back, he will have flatulence and evacuation without his will, and sometimes he is turned on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and at that point do not work on his cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	 But if none of these causes occur, the condition is better and easier to treat.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	 And the treatment for it is that you pierce to drain the abscess cautiously, and place over the affected vertebra olive oil mixed with only a little sunflower oil; place this on there several times during the day until the abscess is drained.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	 Then place a comforting and soothing plaster, and strengthen it with bandages; and instruct the patient to rest and be calm and not to sleep on the side where they feel pain until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	 And if there is separation of the bone (as in dislocation) or any other cause that has already detached from it, then it is necessary to cut along the spine and remove that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with suture if it is large; and then treat it with some ointment until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	 Here is the line-by-line translation of the given text:
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	 And if you feel bones broken in the patient, then you should open that area, remove the splintered bone fragments, and treat the wound with the prescribed remedy until it heals.
Capitol .x.	 Chapter X
De restauracio de la ancha.	 On the restoration of the eyes.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	 The bones of the eyes are often broken, and if they break, the fracture occurs at their ends and extends along their length, bending towards the inside; this causes pain in the affected area and a stabbing sensation, and the leg becomes numb when it is broken.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	 And the treatment for this is that you should extend your hand over the area until it covers the break, matching its shape.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	 And if the break is only at the end of it, then you should envelop that part according to what appears to you by reasonable judgment, wrapping it until it resembles its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	 But if the break is in the length or has already bent towards the inside, then you should have the patient lie on their back until you are ready to restore that break.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	 And then, when you have wrapped it, place a poultice on top of it, and then place a board or plank over it, securing it firmly with bandages so that you do not fear the splintering of the break or the dislodging of the board.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	 And moisten the cavity with water that fills it until it reaches the narrowest point according to its shape, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	 But if an abscess is found, then cease from stretching the patient and from their restoration until the abscess is settled, and place water on it to soothe according to what was previously said; then return to the patient's restoration, and strengthen them as needed.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	 And if there are shards or fractures in the bones, then treat them accordingly.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter Eleven
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	 On the restoration of a fractured elbow.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	 The elbow is that which is between the shoulder and the head.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	 And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways. The first is that you take a thick stick of medium length like this:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	 And at both ends there are ligaments attached, and then it is suspended from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	 Then the patient should sit on a stool, and then they should throw out their broken arm onto the stick until it reaches the middle part of the stick where the curve is located.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	 Certainly! Here's the translation of the given text into English:
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	 Here is the translation of the sentence:
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	 And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you strengthen over the fracture with one bandage and over that with another bandage, and each of the two assistants extends it in their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	 And therefore if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then half of the bandage should be placed above the knee, and the other half below the fracture towards the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	 And similarly, if the fracture is close to the elbow, then the bandage should be placed over that area and over the elbow itself.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	 Wrap it with ease and without difficulty, and once wrapped according to what is needed and in a good manner, then strengthen it so that an abscess does not form.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	 However, if an abscess does form, then leave the bandage in place for seven days, and place over it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess subsides, and then strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	 And the manner of strengthening it is that you place a poultice over the fracture, and then wrap a cloth bandage around the poultice; and then fix the arm on that support, and place your open hand over its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	 Here is a line-by-line translation of the given sentence into English:
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	 And then use of straw (or hay).
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	 And you must place on the fracture that straw which is broader and stronger than the others; and place between each straw the width of a finger, and let the length of the straws be according to the break with an addition of three fingers' breadth in total.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	 And then strengthen over the straws with the binding I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	 And it is that your binding on the place of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	 And the longer the fracture, the narrower the binding should be.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	 And then, if you see the arrangement of the straws and the binding as we have said at the time when you restore the member to its position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if you fear an abscess, then leave the binding and the straws in place for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	 And then consider the binding in all parts for three days so that swelling or inflammation does not occur in the place, or it is forbidden for food to reach the member due to the excess of tightness of the binding; and therefore correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	 But if you are confident that none of this will happen, then do not loosen the binding until after three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	 And let the patient's sleep be upon their back, and their hands be on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	 And place a cooked pillow full of wool upon it, and in every hour of the night or day ensure that the figure of the broken member is not dissolved or weakened, and that the bandage is softened; therefore, correct this with all your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	 And place the patient's food according to the order we have mentioned before, so that the food is light at first until it begins to strengthen; then it is necessary to make the food of the patient heavier.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	 For it is customary for the adjutor and the thigh to be strengthened in forty days; and then it is necessary that they are loosened, and a bath is administered, and the area is treated with ointments that correct this condition.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	 And if the fracture is shallow, then you should not loosen from it the bandage and splints for fifteen days or two months.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	 On the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	 The arm is composed of two bones which are called the two forearms; one of these is small and is that which is called the thumb, and the other is large and is placed below the small bone, on the lower side.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	 And if only the large fireplace or the small one is broken and they are both shattered together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	 And when the small fireplace is broken above, its repair will be easy, and its healing will be easier still.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	 And when the lower part of the fireplace is broken, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	 And worse than that is when two bones are broken at once.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	 Therefore, if the broken bone is the small fireplace above, it is fitting for the doctor to make a small incision with ease until it is healed.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	 But if the large fireplace is broken, then it is necessary to make a more vigorous incision.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	 And if both fireplaces are broken together, then you must make the incision much stronger.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	 And it is necessary that you make the shape of the hand for its repair and extend the incision over a cushion, and let the pulse of the hand be on top, as well as all the other things mentioned, and the auricular vein should be lower than the others, and the patient should sit on a fallen chair.  />
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	 And there should be a cushion in front of him on the bed or bed frame, so that the patient does not fall.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	 And immediately the assistant should extend the patient's arm on the side that is lower with his hand or a bandage, and another assistant should do the same above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	 And immediately the doctor should envelop the bones so that they are reduced to their best shape possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	 And if there is a fracture of the bone, then you should reduce all the pieces in their place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	 And if it appears to you that the fracture is separated and you are not confident in its restoration, then you should make an incision on it and perform it according to the method we have mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	 But if the fracture is with a wound, I have already written about that in a separate chapter, so take care of it according to that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	 And if an abscess appears at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with oil and white wax ointment, and it should be neither too thin nor too thick, and wrap a strong cloth around it with fine stitches until the abscess subsides; then remove the ointment and place a prepared poultice made from powdered myrobalan and egg whites on it; and immediately place irons; and let the iron that is placed on that fracture be wider and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	 And know that the name of the stars on the arm can be seen in the major dispositions, whether it is a fracture in one finger or in two fingers at once.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	 And then place your bandage on the site of the fracture as strongly and as vehemently as possible. And when the bandage will be closer to the upper parts of the fracture or the lower parts, place the bandage a little wetter, according to what was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And the cloths with which you wrap around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough. The thread used to tie it should be medium in thickness, neither too fine nor too coarse, as we have advised.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	 And examine the member and the bandage after some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	 And if something happens that requires a correction, as soon as it occurs to the member, then it is necessary for you to soak the member in hot water until the swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	 And leave the member unbound until it rests, and then return the bandage.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	 And if the bandage is softened and the bone is healed and looks like this, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	 If nothing occurs to the patient from those causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary for him to be released before about 20 days or thereabouts.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	 Then the patient's hand should be suspended by its ability to move, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	 And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or very lightly it is restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the condition of the complexions and the disposition of the nature.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	 On the restoration of a finger or toe fracture.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	 Know that in the fingers and toes, fractures are delayed, and only happen rarely.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	 And when there is a fracture or dislocation in the hand, then the patient should lie on his back and before him place a cushion according to necessity, and then place the patient's hand on it extended outward.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	 Then the attendant should extend the broken bones, and the physician should bind them together until they are well joined with a good join.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	 And then it is necessary to place plaster and wool, unless an abscess forms; and then place a splint on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	 Based on the pattern and context from the previous translation, let's translate the given sentence:
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	 And let there be a sheet or cloth with which to lift the body, so that it may be applied to the palm of the hand; strengthen it as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	 But if the fracture is in the separated parts on the outside, then place one cloth above and another cloth below the separation on the palm, so that the hand may be open and straight; and then place the strap, just as the hand is turned to a right angle between the two with bandages.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	 And if there is a fracture in any of the phalanges of the aforementioned [fingers], then if it is the distal phalanx, let it be splinted as needed and strengthened with the palm, and if you wish, place a small straight bandage on it so that the fracture may be elevated and not worsened.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	 But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or the index finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then let it be splinted and bound with its own finger, or all of them may be bound continuously, which is better; or place a small bandage on top, just as we have said for the distal phalanx.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	 And consider, in your restoration, and then that, the arrangement of a cautious and opposed apostema — with your operation — according to what is needed when any of those causes occur, as has been repeatedly stated about it.
Capitol .xiv.	 Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	 Of the restoration of a fracture in the bone of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	 The thighbone is often broken and becomes apparent to the touch when it splits into two parts, one above the other.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	 And the restoration of it is done thus: the bandage is tied above the fracture and another below it, and the patient lies prone on his stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	 And then the attendant extends all the bandages to their respective parts according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	 But if it is near the head of the thigh, then let the bandage be close to the knee at the patellar part, so that the extension goes upward, and the other bandage below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	 And similarly, if the break is near the knee, then let the bandage be made close to the knee, and the extension to the lower parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	 And then the physician joins the bones with both hands until he reduces it according to its natural appearance and the bone is united by a good union; then it is necessary to place a poultice and tight bandages, lest an abscess occur in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	 If an abscess occurs in the patient, then leave it for some days until the abscess is fully formed, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	 The stricture of the patient should be done as follows: wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess material; then wrap the leg until it reaches the ankle and the root of the thigh bone.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	 Insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the bone, and let the ends of the thread protrude from the higher part of both sides; then wrap around the leg and thigh the excess material from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	 And then place on the thigh in the area of that fracture some splints, and from those place a splint on the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	 And then fill the spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the stricture is consolidated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	 And then begin with a strong bandage in the middle over the area of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you move away from the area of the fracture, your bandage should be lighter and moister.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	 This line appears to describe a medical procedure involving the ligaments or tendons of the foot and their connection to other parts of the body. Here's a possible translation:
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	 Sure, here's the translation:
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	 Based on the given sentence and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation into English:
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	 And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is so severe that even splints cannot be applied to it, as we have said in the arm and shoulder.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	 However, in the restoration of the patient in this manner, no limping occurs; and if it is restored alone, or another leg is applied to it, then it is necessary that the one who is always lame should limp.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	 And know that the thigh is strong in 40 days, or a little more, or a little less, and all this depends on the diversity of complexions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	 On the restoration of the fracture of the knee joint.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	 Know that a fracture of the knee joint happens rarely, but it occurs frequently due to twisting.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	 However, if the fracture occurs, then it is not more than a crack or hole in its parts, with or without damage, and everything is dependent on sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	 And the restoration of it is such that what is broken from its parts should be made equal with those mentioned until it is joined and united as much as possible by means of balance, ease, and skill.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	 And then place a plaster and place it on that round area if you need to use it; strengthen it with a strap on top as appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	 And then consider all the precautions that we have recommended for other fractures, similarly as it is done with abscesses and similar situations, so that one prepares for any mishap with what is appropriate for him until he is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	 ### Chapter XVI
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	 ### About the Restoration of a Fractured Thigh
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	 Know that in the thigh there are two bones: one is large and is called the femur; the other is thin and is called the fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	 And as it happens with the different types of fractures that occur in both bones of the arm, so too is the restoration of it like the restoration of the arm, and its operation is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	 And if both bones are broken at the same time, the thigh becomes completely disjointed.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	 And if the thinner bone is broken, the thigh becomes partially disjointed in the front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	 And if the larger bone is broken, it causes an outward displacement, which are conditions not familiar to you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	 And now administer extension, traction, and ligature of the tendons according to that same principle.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	 However, it is necessary that if the thigh fracture has many fragments, then the extension should be less and lighter, and alleviate with your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	 And in the case of an operation on the thigh, and when you straighten the tendons and complete all the necessary operations, then take wooden splints which are placed below the sole, made similarly to palm branches; choose those with a small thickness and not from the hands, and let their length be according to the length of the thigh, and insert one at the bottom.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	 Then wrap each splint in two layers of cloth according to its length, and place one at the top of the thigh on one side and the other on the opposite side, and let them extend from the bottom to just below the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	 Then tie the two splints in three places: at both ends and in the middle, because with this structure the thigh is prevented from bending to the right or left, and it remains stable.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	 And a splint of wood has already been administered according to the length of the leg, and it has been placed on the patient's leg so that they may remain still.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	 And it is especially important that you do this in cases of fracture, and when the injury is severe.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 And every day consider the leg and study it closely, and you should guard against swelling or inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of those causes occur, then attend to the patient with what is necessary until they are healed.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	 On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	 The ankle does not often suffer complete fractures; rather, it is the bones of the foot that sometimes suffer fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely suffer fractures, and they do not suffer anything more than bruising in most cases.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	 And if the bones of the foot should suffer a fracture and those bones are raised above one another, then place the patient's foot on the ground as if they were walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	 Then place the other foot on top of the raised bones, and press down on them, and squeeze until they return to their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	 And then place an emplastrum and wool on top of it, and place beneath the sole of the foot a small board with two flat surfaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	 And then strengthen it with the foot in a straight position, as you have wrapped it with cloth and other bandages that are needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	 And when three or four days have passed with them, then you unbind the bandage, for you will find the bones joined together, either firmly attached or dislocated, and the operation on those is as follows:
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	 But if some are dislocated, then restore those and join them as I have instructed you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	 And then place on the dislocated toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be a little wider than it; and then place under the foot this board that has been recommended to you, and strengthen it with a proper bandage.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	 But if what is dislocated among the bones are two or three or more, then you place on each toe a splint of its corresponding size wrapped in linen cloth, and strengthen the board at the lowest part of the foot, and let one of the surfaces of the board be under the sole of the foot so that it holds it well.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	 And it is fitting that you do not forget to consider all the causes that have been mentioned to you in other fractures of accidents which we have discussed; and prepare yourself for every accident with what is necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	 Chapter XVIII
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	 On the Fracture of a Woman's Pubic Bone, the Penis Bone, and a Man's Member
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	 When the woman's pubic bone is broken, make her sit in a low chair, and then incline her slightly backward, and hold her from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	 And then the midwife should fill the pubic bone with cotton, and it should be done in her pubic bone as shown; and then the woman should be shaken, and her back raised little by little, because everything is forgotten until the fracture returns to its place before the bone, as shown.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	 And then place poultices on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton with ease, and then she will urinate, and return it and bring it back in the manner in which you placed it at the beginning, and then return to the first poultice.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	 And do this for seven days or thereabouts, because by then it will have healed.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	 And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and place over its opening a reed cannula; then insert the entire bladder into his anus, and next, blow through the cannula with all your strength until the bladder is inflated inside the anus, for the fracture will return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	 And let it be filled with cotton and left there for some days, as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	 And when the bone of a man or woman is broken, then administer for its restoration and fixation that which we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	 And that which is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and rarely happens, especially to those who have some learning and practice and understand this my book well; for that fracture signifies to you the greatest dispositions in the correct pathway for restoration and stricture of it, and thus understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	 But in the case of a man's penis when it is broken, take a sheath of goatskin, and insert the penis into it; then place over it a bandage of cloth, and let it be wrapped up, and then leave it alone for three days or around that, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	 On restoring fractures of the bones when there is a wound.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	 It is appropriate for someone who experiences a fracture with a wound, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or shinbone, or similar to that, that you bloodlet them immediately if the conditions of bloodletting are favorable or testify thus as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	 And if the wound is bleeding, then you should restrain it by sprinkling powdered dry wine on it, unless there is another cause.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	 And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess develops.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	 But if an abscess occurs, then you leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day at all, because you will cause harmful accidents to happen.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	 But if the broken bone is prominent and exposed above the skin, then you must make an effort to reduce it and level it with your hands with ease and minimal force.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	 This text appears to be discussing the treatment of a medical condition, possibly a dislocation or fracture. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	 And let there be a return [to the previous state], and in him there should be little roughness so that he is not doubled. You must have the comprehension of this at the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	 And let there be an acute extremity to which there is an edge in its extremities; and let it be above him, tending towards roughness, and from the greater part of him to the divided parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And this is his form:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	 And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means "little shovel".
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	 Because it is necessary that the tip of the pointed instrument be placed elevated above the prominent bone's extremity.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	 And press down on it once until the bone returns and is equalized with some liquid.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	 And so you must strive to equalize the extremities of the fracture between them. And if the broken extremity is delicate and does not accept the instrument well, then it is necessary that you insert the tip of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	 But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have recommended, then insert it with what is suitable for it from among the instruments which we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in any way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	 And next, scrape off what remains on the bones of roughness and small splinters.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	 And when the bone is reduced and afterwards the patient finds a very intense pain, know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do this which you will confer great benefit on the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	 When you have completed the restoration that you do on the bone, and then submerge a cloth in black stiptic wine, especially if it is summer, and do not place wax or other substance containing oil on the wound, so that it does not cause inflammation or corruption in it.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	 And then administer steels at the time of your completion of the bone restoration, and let the wound remain uncovered so that you may incise the flesh with forceps and use dressings according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	 And be very careful not to strain the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this and caused death or severe illness on their patients, which is unhealthy.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	 And if there is slight swelling, soften it, unlike the swelling of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	 And if the wound is large or bad and you fear that worse accidents may occur, as we have mentioned, and you find pain in the area, then it is not suitable to place cushions on that spot, but rather make an envelope of hard cloths instead of cushions and strengthen them with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	 And when the wound has already begun to heal after one or two days, and it has generated a scab, then remove from above the cloth that you had placed over it with caution, and administer calves (ointments), such as those we commonly use for treating wounds, like tetrafarmacon ointment and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	 And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is healed and firm, and it is important that the limb be prepared in such a way that the pus runs away from it easily to the lower parts.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	 If many days have passed and the wound is neither healed nor has a scab formed, then know that here are the signs of smallpox, for which you should probe the wound with a lancet.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	 And of those signs, those that are separate and extracted, those that are not separated and cause the member to swell and cause pain, you must cut open according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	 "And if it happens that the wound is festering or has developed gangrene, which are signs of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to apply to each one of these [wounds] water suitable for the treatment as described in the preceding chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	 "And concerning that matter which I will discuss and you should apply your attention to: when the bone is broken, it should protrude from the member like the bones of the hip or shoulder, similar to those of large members; do not attempt to set it or extract it because many times death occurs due to this; leave it alone so that it can drain, because usually it will fall off on its own within 20 or 30 days; and then treat the wound if you see fit, and if not, leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	 "Chapter 20
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	 "On the treatment of nodes [swellings] that occur in the wake of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	 "This swelling often occurs in the wake of a bone fracture, especially around the joints, and it takes on the shape of the member; and it greatly hinders the member from its natural function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	 Based on the provided translation style and the medieval medical context, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	 And let there be no extraction of that [something] for several days; and then release it and repeat the process, until the swelling is reduced; or apply pressure on that lead sheet firmly, because lead has the property to reduce all inflammation in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 But if the swelling has already turned into stone and is tight, and it is necessary to remove it promptly, then cut it through its highest part, and slice off the excess and prominent parts, or rasp it with sharp rasps until it is reduced; and care for that area until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	 ### Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	 ### Restoration of Fractures When Restored, and Then the Member Remains Subtle and Fragile According to Its Nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	 When a bone fracture is restored, and then the member remains subtle and fragile, this happens only for several reasons: one of which is the excessive dissolution of the ligament and its bonding, not done as needed; or due to an excess of tightness in the ligaments until nourishment is prevented from reaching the member; or due to excessive superfluous wrapping; or due to excessive movement at the wrong time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and their weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	 And the treatment for this is to give the patient food to eat and make their heart tender until their blood is replenished; administer a bath; and intermix joy and happiness upon them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	 Then place a weight on the member, so that the weight draws to it the necessary nutrition, or continue to wash it with warm water until the nourishment flows and the body returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter XXII
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	 Of the treatment of dislocated bones, when they are restored crookedly and the operation is forbidden from doing this:
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	 When it happens to the member already restored that its healing from crookedness and prominence of the bone is prevented by a defect in the form of the member, yet nevertheless the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, then you should not accept the word of one who thinks that the member has been newly dislocated.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	 However, there have been many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is very blameworthy, causing great fear, the sign of which is deathly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	 But if the limpness and nodule are recent, then they should be washed with warm water in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as leaves of mullein and root of madder, and melilot, and similar to those; and a plaster should be made for them with a well-made softening ointment; or let there be taken mucilage of madder root and mixed with egg white or oil of sweet almonds, and let it be plastered with that; or let fat figs be taken and crushed with juice of pomegranate, and similar to those from the medicines which are named emollient and consolidating.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	 And sometimes it is resolved with gentle and continuous rubbing that should be done with wet hands, and the member's movement should be administered at all times of the day.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	 But if the curvature has already progressed and is severe, turning into stone, and a cure with iron becomes necessary, then it is appropriate that the bone be cut above the deformity, and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and any excess from the node of that same bone should be removed with fine scissors, and ease should be administered to the patient with care and diligence.
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	 About the discourse on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	 Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints from its proper place, which prevents movement and distorts the shape of the member, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	 Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to immediately perforate and reduce it, without delay, because if it is delayed, the area becomes swollen and very difficult to reduce the dislocation with water.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	 And for this reason, it is not advisable to move or stretch the area during the swelling, because many views cause spasm and intense pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	 When this occurs, it is necessary that you resort to the phlebotomy of the patient, and then allow the abscess to rest; and then wrap the limb with hot water and oil, and then reduce it gently.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	 And let all the members be treated with that which reminds them of their place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	 And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation following what was stated about fractures; from the highest part of the body to the lowest.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	 On the treatment of lower jaw dislocation.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	 Both jaws can be dislocated; if not treated in time, the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are removed from their places by a slight movement and are softened a little, or they are completely dislocated until they are softened at the joint, to the point where saliva flows from the patient's mouth and he cannot hold it nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in its place.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	 But when the dislocation is slight, it returns by itself with little treatment.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	 "However, if the dislocation is complete and total, then it should be gently reduced right away, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 "And let the minister hold the patient's head, and let the doctor insert his thumbs into the mouth of the patient on each side of the dislocated jawbone, if the dislocation is one-sided; or let him insert both thumbs together, if the dislocation is two-sided, and with the rest of his hands let him support the outside of the patient's jawbones to equalize them. And he should command the patient to cease moving their jaws and allow them to return to their proper place; and the doctor should adjust the jawbone and help it return to its original position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	 "And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer steam with hot water and oil until a gentle reduction of both is achieved, and do not delay the reduction of both any longer, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	 "And when they return and are aligned, and the patient's mouth is closed and not relaxed, then place a compress of cloth with wax and oil over those areas, and it should be made of wax and fine oil; and then bind them gently with soft bandages.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	 And let the sleep of the patient be on their back, and their head be placed between two pillows, so that they do not move to the right or left; and do not force them to eat anything; when their food is ready, only then should they eat whatever they want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	 And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking or speaking until the jaw is healed and closed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	 And if the reduction of two dislocated jaws in some time is not converted to their places, then frequent fevers and continuous sweating occur, and quickly inflate the patient's belly, and quickly they vomit pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	 And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of death; and most often, those who experience this die within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	 ### Chapter 25:
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	 On the reduction of the displacement of the furculum and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	 The furculum is not displaced from the interior of the chest due to its connection with the feet; and sometimes it is displaced to the exterior part, which can be detected by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	 And the recovery of the patient is that he lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	 And then you close the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	 And then place on that plaster some powder and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	 But the extremity that is the elbow and is continuous with it is not dislocated in any way; therefore, it must be reduced and immobilized as we have said and according to what you are able to do.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	 And then place on that plaster some powder, and stricture, and command the patient to keep quiet and at rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	 And with this same treatment is reduced the extremity of the muscle when it has been separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter .26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	 On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	 Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated from the titilli to the humerus.  (Note: The text says "titillic" but I assume it should be "titilli", referring to a part of the scapula)
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	 And the second is that it is dislocated at the junction above the humerus, and this is done late; and it is not dislocated at the junctions behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the junctions in front of the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	 And if a strong blow strikes some men by striking or falling, and their muscles are swollen with a hard swelling, it is suspected that this may be due to dislocation.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	 Then it is necessary for you to explore this inside before being certain of it, and then proceed with the treatment of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	 And the dislocation is known when, after tickling it in the affected areas, you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, because you find a clear difference between them; and you find concavity at the head of the muscle, and after tickling you feel the touch of the head of the muscle as if it were an egg, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor move it completely.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	 If it is dislocated, you should place your feet or hands on it, and then you will find a clear touch that is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	 And this dislocation can be reduced lightly when it is recent and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	 And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand to the affected area; then places his fingers below the ticklish spot and lifts the joint with strength back to its place, and the minister raises the patient's hand and extends it outwards; then places it below so that it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	 If the previously mentioned method does not work and the dislocation occurs as it did at first, then after several days, the patient should be bathed in hot water and an emollient ointment should be administered, one that softens and loosens like altea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	 Then the patient should be laid on their back and placed on a small pillow made of wool that is well-balanced between firmness and softness. The doctor should place his heel on the pillow, raise the head of the muscle with all his strength, pull the patient's hand to prevent it from being drawn away, and another assistant should hold the patient's head so that it is not drawn away, for this will soon return to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	 And if you wish to do it in this manner: you should have present a man who is taller than the patient and stands on the opposite side of the dislocation. He should insert his arm under the pillow of the patient and lift the pillow until the patient is suspended in the air, and another assistant should pull the patient's hand away from their stomach.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	 If the patient is light, then it is necessary that with another person he be suspended, so that gravity can help, because the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 And it is reduced in another manner: and that is to place on the ground a long pole whose head is round in shape, like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin. Then place cushions under the patient; since cloths are placed on top of the pole's head, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and then his hand is extended towards the other part, and his body is stretched out with force on the other side, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	 And if it is difficult to reduce him for all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this cure: and that is to take a pole whose length is two arms long, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness should be less at the top according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	 And then place cushions on the round head of the pole so that it does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	 Then place cushions under the patient's chin, and stretch his hand or arm on the pole to the sides, and bind the pole over the shoulders, arms, and the end of his hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	 Approach the patient's arms and place them on a ladder according to their length, with one hand extended towards the sides, and the other side suspended from the other part, because the joint will soon enter.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	 Once the patient's treatment is completed according to each possible method, it is necessary for you to place a small pillow of wool under their shoulders; and then apply a plaster made from powdered myrobalan with egg white over all the muscles, so that it covers them completely; and then tighten the pillow firmly; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and the patient's hand should be tied to their neck, and left undisturbed, and the patient's hand should not be moved for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	 It is necessary that the patient's food be scarce until the member is comforted, because it is lighter on their healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	 And then the food should be given more abundantly, especially around day seven or five, and exercise some movement; and thus if it is firmly set and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	 But if the joint is dislocated many times due to moisture that happens to them or for any other cause, then it is necessary to administer a pointed cautery with three holes, as was said before in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	 And if all of this is done and after approximately seven days the bandage and joint are not immobile, and the compress and tightness are reduced over them several times, and it is still not immobile and also cannot raise that arm to its original position, then know that his nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	 Of the dislocation that is made in the feet and the chest or back parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension by hand until it returns to its place.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 And another tight bandage should be applied, and care for it until it heals.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	 And if it happens that the healing is heavy on the limb and there is delay in its movement, then let the patient use hot baths many times until that heaviness is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	 Of the treatment for shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	 Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it can be dislocated in all directions, but most often towards the front or the back. The dislocation of it cannot be hidden from you because it either drops below the sight or touch depending on which direction it is dislocated. And when you adjust the dislocated shoulder with the hand, this is clearly indicated to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	 And it is necessary that you cut and reduce the dislocation quickly before it becomes an abscess, because if it turns into an abscess, it is difficult to reduce, and hardly heals completely; especially when it is in the shoulder blade area, because it is worse than all other types of dislocations, and more painful, and many people die from that.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	 And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that his hand be extended with two hands, and his arm be spread out, and the hands of the doctor be on the elbow and below him, and he pushes the joint with the tips of his fingers at once, or with the edge of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	 But if the dislocation is in the anterior shoulder area, then return it by bending the hand with his own hand, until he strikes the elbow with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	 And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer very strong extension and much force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	 And it is that two assistants extend the arm, and hold it in the same way by two assistants so that it is not removed before the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	 And then you should gently turn his arm in every direction because it is wrapped with a long folded cloth around his hand or a bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	 And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil so that this will assist in the lubrication of the joint; and then he should push the joint vigorously until it returns to its place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	 And then, after the reduction of it, it is necessary that he be placed on a plaster in which there is astringency and dryness with egg white, and it should be tightly bound, and his arm should be suspended from the neck, and let it rest for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	 And then he should be unbound; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you should untie his bandage and leave it thus.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	 And if you see that the joint is not strengthened, then you should repeat the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days until it is tightened; and then unbind it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	 But if seriousness occurs after the reduction of the joint, and his condition is in movement, then administer moistening with a bath and subtle friction, and compression until he is relieved; or place on the joint poultices, which are made from thick dough; and then bind it, and leave it on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	 Sure, let's break down this sentence:
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	 "When bathing, it should be done until it is clean.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	 "And if you wish, place a piece of moist and scraped cowhide over the wound, and bind it tightly; do this several times, because this makes it moist and reduces it to its proper state.
Capitol .xxviii.	 "Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	 "Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the elbow, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	 "Dislocation of the hand sometimes occurs, and reducing this dislocation is easy, unlike other joints. However, it is important to be quick in reducing it within the hour of its dislocation, before the area becomes swollen or a swelling appears.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 "The reduction of this dislocation is done by placing the patient's hand joint on a table and having them extend their hand, while the physician places their hand or palm on the prominence of the joint and pushes until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	 "However, it is important to consider if the palm has already been dislocated towards the back of the hand, then have the patient place the back of their hand on a table and extend and reduce it; and if the dislocation is preceding the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be intrinsically on the table, so that the physician's hand falls on that prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	 And therefore, if it returns quickly, it is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a plaster to draw out the abscess and leave it; and do not repeat this, because otherwise you cannot endure or survive the reduction of the pus that passes through the day.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	 But still the joint remains according to its twisting nature; and do not tell the patient any cause, except that their hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then know that the nerves are pinched or twisted, and in this case, do nothing for them except to strengthen it with a cautery near its seat and give them something strong.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	 Therefore, when the swelling has returned, then place on it the plaster that we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; and after that, let it be released and let it be left, and exercise their hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	 But if the movement of it is stopped and some gravity occurs in it, then soften that area with hot water and some friction several times, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	 Of the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	 Sometimes the fingers are dislocated in all parts.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	 And when one of these fingers is dislocated on the back of the palm or on its belly, then straighten the finger and push the dislocation out with your thumbs until it returns to its normal position.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	 And then support the tip of the finger, and suspend that part to which it is dislocated for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	 Then suspend the finger and stretch it until it is straight in its socket by the next day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	 And at night when you sleep, bind the finger as described, and do not stop unbinding it during the day to exercise with movement, and bind it again at night; continue doing this for a few days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	 And do the same thing if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, and bind it to that place and perform the first operation again with your thumb until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	 Similarly, do the same thing when it is dislocated in other places.
Capitol .xxx.	 Chapter 30
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	 On the treatment of dislocation of the spine in the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	 When a complete dislocation of any of the vertebrae in the back or neck occurs, and many vertebrae are moved from their place, then in that case there is no cure, because death will come to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	 The first source sentence translates to:
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	 "However, the treatment for this is to first consider if the jaundice occurs in infancy, because then there is neither a cure nor healing from it at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	 "However, regarding those that come from a blow or a bruise or something similar to those, the ancients have already spoken about the treatments with elaborate discourse, of which the most useful returns; but I have already shortened it because the least escapes from excess, for my proximity to my own opinion in this exposition, with which I have explained and formatted it here using various instruments of that with which I will show and explain it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	 "And I say that jaundice occurring at the soles of the feet is neither beneficial nor curable; and similarly, when it occurs on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	 "And only those are cured which occur in the back specifically with what I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	 "And the patient should be laid on their back near a wall, and a wet cloth should be placed beneath them to prevent their feet from becoming cold.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	 "And then a straight stick should be placed upright in the ground at the head of the patient, and another stick at the foot of the bed on the other side.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	 Here is a possible translation of the given text:
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence:
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	 And then each servant should extend the bandage to the base of the beam, and ensure that the two beams and their respective bandages are not moved from their places, but rather secured as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	 And the doctor should place his palms firmly on the spine until it returns to its proper position, or alternatively, place his hands on a board and then adjust his feet on the board until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	 But if it does not return with this method, then take a board whose length or width is approximately three spans, and make an opening in the wall near the patient so that one end of the board can be inserted into it.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	 Then place the middle of the board on the spine, and the doctor should put his feet on the other end of the board and press firmly until the spine is straightened and returns to its proper position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	 And if you wish, turn the patient over with your hand, and lay him on the ground so that his head is between two beams whose length is one arm's length each, and also place his head between two uprights; let the distance between each beam be one palm's width, and then make a hole in each beam into which a rope can be threaded, and secure each beam firmly to the ground so that it cannot be moved.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	 And at the patient's extremity is a hole in which the bone has formed, the length of which is one handspan and it is curved; and in the other two bones there is something similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 Then tighten the straps that you have tied on the patient's feet around the hole that is nearest to their head, and the straps that you have tied on their hips around the turn that is nearest to their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	 Then there should be one assistant at each turn, who turns the patient with their hands, and the doctor straightens the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	 And this is the shape of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	 And then, after the spine has been straightened and the area has been smoothed out, you should apply a desiccating poultice with egg white, and then wool; and then place on top of the poultice a wooden board whose width is three fingers or about that, and whose length covers the area of the hump, and on top of the spinal curve.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	 Then bind it with the strap that we mentioned earlier, and feed the patient with fine food until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	 And if there remains any prominence in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and smooth with a long-term regimen of the diet that we have recommended; and a lead plate has already been applied to that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	 And sometimes it happens that there is pressure on the last of the spine's vertebrae, and it is believed that this is due to displacement; and that bone is the one that if moved, it should not be approached with this medicine, because it will cause death.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Capítulo .XXXI. (Translation: Chapter .31)
De curacio de anca dislocada.	 Of the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	 Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should only be considered as a dislocation, and not what happens to other small joints with slight displacement and cavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	 And the hip joint can be dislocated in four ways, because it can be dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	 And it is most commonly dislocated inward, and rarely forward or backward.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	 The sign of dislocation inward is that when you place the healthy leg next to the affected one, the affected leg appears longer and the joint is more prominent than on the healthy side. The patient cannot bend their affected foot towards their shin, and the area of the swelling is hot, indicating that the head of the femur has reached there.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	 The sign of someone who has experienced a dislocation is that their limbs are displaced outward, and the accidents of this condition are contrary to normal conditions.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	 The sign of someone who has experienced a dislocation at the front is that their leg extends according to its usual course, but it cannot be bent without pain in the joint, and if they try to walk, they cannot do so forward; and their urine is retained and their groin is swollen, and you should make them walk on their heels.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	 The sign of someone who has experienced a dislocation at the back is that they cannot extend their joint nor can they bend it as much as usual; and their leg is shorter than the other, and their groin is softened, and the head of the thighbone should be placed in its proper location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	 However, the reduction of this type of dislocation is that you must consider whether the dislocation is old and chronic. If it has already become settled in its current position, then you should not attempt to reduce it, as this is not within your power; and in such cases, it is unnecessary to be impetuous.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	 The text you've provided is likely in Old Occitan, a Romance language that was spoken in southern France during the Middle Ages and had significant influence on the development of modern French, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese. Here’s a line-by-line translation into English:
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	 Sure, I'd be happy to help with that translation. Here it goes line by line:
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	 And if it is an extension of him or of the part from inside to the elbow towards the part of the collarbone, or from behind to the part of the back.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	 And let this extension be done with all of them at once until the patient is raised from the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	 And this type of extension is common to all four [limbs].
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	 And therefore, if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then all kinds of things must be done for the specific cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	 In the reduction of him, when he is dislocated and the dislocation is in the inner parts, it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back with his arms raised; and then place the bandages over the top of the shoulder in that place which is between the head of the humerus and the lower part of the shoulder; and then extend the bandage from above the elbow to the highest part of the clavicle.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	 And then another strong assistant should take the patient's arms and press firmly on the injured shoulder, extending them outward with great force, for this will return it to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	 And this type of treatment is lighter in care with which this member is reduced than other types of treatments.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	 But if you are excused and do not comply with this type of treatment completely, then it is necessary to bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong, light ligament on both heels and ankles.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	 And let the length of each be four times as much, and let the affected leg be extended more than the other by two times.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	 And then have the patient hang over the top of a pole, with their head upwards; and let the length of them from the ground be two arm-lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 And then command a strong youth to lower the head of the cushion, and let another youth be suspended with the patient, and the other youth, using his strength, pushes the cushion downwards, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	 But in the proper reduction, when it is a dislocation that has moved outwards, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back as we have recommended when they were swollen; and let the ligament be strongly tied around the affected leg specifically and around their feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	 And appropriately, two poles should be placed, one on the patient's feet and the other on their head; and similarly, poles adjusted in the middle of the bed should be placed, upon which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being between their thighs, because you need to extend the distance to the parts below so that it is not pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	 And each assistant should stretch out on their respective side, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	 Therefore, if there is a reversal, it will be very good; and otherwise, place it firmly on the same spot and proceed as we said in gelbosity for the same purpose.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	 But make sure that the patient lies quietly on their back.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	 And when the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then it is necessary that the thigh be slightly extended and according to this same account on the bed; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patient's elbow, and then pulls that with the other hand, and with that traction he places that extended down below at the place of the shoulder.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	 And if the dislocation is in the posterior parts, then it is not necessary that the patient be extended down below and be raised off the ground; rather, it is necessary that he be placed on a hard surface, just as we said about the elevation if his shoulder is dislocated to the outside, according to what we have said about his positioning over two shoulders; and it should be on his face with the arms extended, as we have mentioned.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	 And it is necessary that a compression be applied with a board onto the location where there is the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	 Therefore, when the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction of him is not hidden from you, which is that you extend the patient's two legs, and when you see those jaws and the patient extends his leg and expands it without hesitation, then you know that the member has returned to its proper place — at this point, you prepare two cushions and apply a poultice and bind tightly with a bandage so that the swelling is not increased in any of the parts; and have the patient rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	 Then remove the bandage and the poultice, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	 At this point, if you see those jaws in their proper place, then you know that the dislocation has been secured, and therefore allow the patient to go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	 And if you see any sign of swelling, then return and apply a poultice to it, and bind it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	 Then remove that, and have the patient walk on both legs for several days, until he is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	 **Chapter 32.**
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	 Of the cure for dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	 The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated towards the outside, or towards the inside, and more often towards the back; it cannot be dislocated towards the front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	 And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to apply his thigh to his hip; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	 And the restoration of all these ways is that you make the patient lie down straight, so that he can extend his thigh if possible; adhere your back to his face, and place his foot between your feet; then have another person adhere their hand to the shoulder, and hold those hands firmly over the shoulder with strength. Another servant should stretch out his leg until the shoulder returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	 And the sign of restoration is that the thigh adheres effortlessly to the hip.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 Then bandage it and have the thigh adhere to the hip, and then bind both together with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbind them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	 And do not let the patient walk for some days until they are healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	 But if the reduction of it to you is difficult, then administer strong extension with the ointments that have been previously mentioned in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	 On the Treatment of Talus Dislocation
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	 The talus sometimes is displaced by a small movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the direction, and its dislocation occurs either in the inner parts or in the outer parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	 The sign of its dislocation is that you see the talus swelling towards the side to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	 But the treatment of its displacement is a simple reduction, which is to be extended with ease using the hands and then wrapped until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	 But in the treatment of it when it is dislocated according to the direction, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and let him have a strong and courageous servant behind his back in the middle of him.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	 And then you take with your right hand the foot from the upper part, and with your left hand the lower part of the foot in the place of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	 And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with the left hand for two times, and then extend it with the left; and lift the feet of the foot with the right behind the thigh without effort.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	 And do this two times as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	 Then lift the feet of the foot to the thigh the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	 So if it returns in one time or two in this manner, and if you see the foot swollen, it is good; and if not, then on him you repeat the operation, because that returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	 But if to you is forbidden the reduction of him with what we have recommended, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and secure a large rope firmly to the ground, and it should fit between his thighs, and you have already wrapped a cloth around him so that the patient does not get hurt.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	 Then another servant should hold the patient's thighs, and then another servant should extend the foot with his hands or with a rope that lies on the foot's neck; and then each servant should stretch against the extension of their partner, and the rope should be stretched between the patient's thighs, holding it so that the body is not pulled towards the parts behind its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	 And then the physician reduces the dislocation with his hands, while another assistant holds the healthy part at its original place, for the dislocation tends to return easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	 And when the dislocation has returned and you are assured of its reduction, then place a plaster and bind it strongly with bandages, and tie the foot to the leg with a bandage.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	 And you should be careful or watch out for the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over it is not too tight and does not press on them forcefully.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	 And then let it be for two or three days; and if the bandage has softened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	 And then unbind it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	 But if it is necessary for him to walk before that time, there is no certainty that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it may not receive healing.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	 And if an abscess happens to occur, then you should administer in the opening of it that which was mentioned earlier in our account, in another section on treatments and applications, until it is removed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	 The text begins with "Capitol .xxxiiii.", which translates to "Chapter XXXIV" in English. This indicates that the following passage is part of a larger work divided into chapters or sections.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	 "About the treatment of foot dislocation.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	 "It is advisable that the one who is dislocated be wrapped with a cloth of moderate length without effort; and this should not be difficult, rather it is easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	 "But if the dislocation is in some of the toes at the back of the foot, then it is advisable to have the patient sit on a firm surface such as the ground or a table, and be positioned as if walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	 "And then you stand on the patient's feet, and place your foot on top of what appears to be the joint, and then step on it with all your weight until it returns, and you see that it is now wrapped and does not appear swollen.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	 "And then place under the sole of their foot a board that covers the entire foot, which has two ends, and then strengthen it with a decent and firm bandage for three days; and then release it and make them rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and healing is ensured." ️
Capitol .xxxv.	 "Chapter XXXV
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	 "About the types of dislocation that occur with a wound, or with a fracture, or with both.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	 When some cause of those occurs and you endeavor in the treatment of that and in the restoration of the patient, many times death follows.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	 And for this, it is not necessary to assume responsibility over the patient's care, but rather one who is wise in the art, with long experience, merciful and compassionate, slow, not rash or presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning of treatment only medicines that cautiously suppress inflammation, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, except for the one from whom you hope for salvation from danger, along with alleviation of illness, and in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	 And so, strive at once to make the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a careful abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	 And so if the member returns as desired, then administer a regimen that carefully suppresses the abscess and treats the wound with suitable dry ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	 And if the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and the sutures of the bone are separated, then you puncture their marrow, and do as we said in the simple diseases, in the places mentioned above.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	 And guard and avoid as best you can that which is evil in the paths of fear, as my teaching has preceded you; for this is better for you, you should honor your Creator, and it will be more lasting to your glory, and healthier for your true body in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	 Sure! Let's break down the text into parts and then translate it line by line:
Amen.	 **Translation:** Amen.
