Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	 "Thus begin the words of Avicenna.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	 "Oh, children, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last in the science of medicine, and its completion is fulfilled within it, and through its expositions and explanations, it is clear to me that I must complete it with this treatise, which is a division of the operation by hand, namely surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	 "Because the operation by hand has been abandoned in our region and in our time, to the point where its science is greatly diminished, and its traces have disappeared; and nothing remains of it except a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which were altered by most and led astray by those errors and obscurity until their intentions are closed and their power and art are prolonged.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	 "And it is clear to me that I should revive it with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and so that it may come with the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work as it is by addition of the explanation, and for its preparation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	 "But the reason why a skilled artisan with his hand cannot be found in this our time is that the art of medicine is long and its practitioner must first be trained in the science of anatomy, which includes knowledge of the joints of the members and their shapes, as well as their union and separation; and he should have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and sinews, their number and arrangement; and of the pulsating and non-pulsating veins, and the places where they emerge.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	 And for that reason, Hippocrates said that a name is nothing but a word, and it is minor in speech, but most important in the art of healing.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	 But we have already mentioned this at the beginning of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable in what we have said about anatomy will inevitably fall into error, which will lead to the death of men, as I have seen happen many times, because some are educated in this science but abandon it without knowledge or experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	 For I have seen a foolish and inexperienced doctor cut into an scrofulous abscess on the neck of a woman, and he also cut some arteries of the neck, so that a great deal of blood flowed out until the woman died in his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	 And I saw another doctor who attempted to remove a stone from a man who had suffered this condition, and the stone was large. When he tried to pull it out, he took with it a piece of the bladder, so that on the third day the man died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	 And I myself was called to remove that stone, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew for sure that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	 And I saw another doctor who received payment of one duc from our land for surgery, and he treated a black castrated man whose thigh was fractured; the ignorant doctor prepared with pillows and cloths tied strongly over the wound, not allowing the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	 Then he released him according to his wishes, then bound him again, and left him bandaged for several days and ordered that the bandage be removed; and it happened in this way until the thigh and the foot were suppurated, and he reached destruction.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	 And I was called to him, and prepared to remove the bandage, and after achieving peace and calm, he admitted to his pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	 But however, the corruption had already set in the limb, so it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the limb until the patient was endangered.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	 And I saw another doctor who punctured a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after a few days, until the evil within him was magnified.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	 This is because the black cautery is pure of melancholic humor, so it should not be applied with all iron, but only to the part that has suffered, and let the rest remain free from it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	 And for this reason, my sons, it is necessary that the operation with the hand be planned in two ways: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is work with which there is danger in the greatest disposition.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	 And I have already addressed this in every place of this book where an operation is performed with error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against this and leave it, so that the pages do not find a way to speak and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	 Therefore, take up your weapons with diligence and under the protection of God, and your patients with happiness and resoluteness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	 And use the best way through the grace of God to obtain health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and keep your weapons away from what makes you fearful, so that confidence in your faith and in your name does not fail you; for it is more fitting to your glory, both now in this world and later to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	 Galen has already discussed this in some of his lectures:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	 "Do not treat evil patients, lest you be called evil doctors.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	 And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	  Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	 The first chapter is ordered about the head and the forms of instruments and the iron points of the cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	 The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The second chapter is about incisions and perforations, and cups (ventouses), and wounds, and the extraction of arrows and similar things; all are arranged and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	 Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	 The third chapter is about restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twists and similar things; this chapter is ordered concerning the head from top to bottom, and the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	 About cauterization with fire and sharp medicine and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	 With this begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	 I wish to speak about the qualities of the assistants for this cauterization and their drawbacks, and in which circumstances cautery should be avoided.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	 Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the assistant for cauterization and their drawbacks is a long and complex discourse, subtle in its knowledge and hidden in secrecy; and many wise men have spoken about it, and they have disagreed among themselves, and for me it suffices to touch upon some of their discourses, lest this become too lengthy. ︎
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	 And so I say that you should apply cautery universally to any and all ailments, whether they have material substance or not, except for two ailments which are immaterial conditions.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	 For the dry and material condition, it is best to refrain from using cautery; because some say that cautery is beneficial for such a condition, while others argue against it, claiming that cautery is not suitable for an illness caused by heat and dryness, as the nature of fire is hot and dry. Therefore, it is appropriate to treat a hot and dry illness with cold and moist treatment.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	 And I disagree with those who say the opposite, that cautery is beneficial for all hot and dry illnesses found in human bodies. For when you compare the human body and its humidity to the condition of fire, you will find the human body cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	 And I say by the reasoning above that experience has already revealed this to me several times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	 However, it is not necessary to go over what has already been thoroughly examined and practiced in the chapter on cautery by previous experience. One who knows the diversity of human conditions, the nature of illnesses within them, their causes, symptoms, and duration can understand this.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	 In the other conditions, do not be afraid, especially in cases of moist and cold diseases, for all doctors have agreed on this matter, and there is no disagreement about using cautery in these cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	 And know, children, that the secret of treatment by fire cautery and its goodness have been proven by using medicinal cautery, for fire is simple and its action only affects the member on which it is applied and does not harm the other members connected to it except slightly.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	 But the action of medicinal cautery reaches those members from which it is distant, and it quickly brings healing to the difficult-to-cure diseased member and quickly heals it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	 But the fire, due to its superiority and the goodness of its substance, does only this: it causes superfluous [things] to leave. And we know this by experience and by the long service of studying the art about the truth of the causes; and for this reason I am excused from the length of the speech. And if it were not that it is not read in my book, here I would have hidden a secret with fire, and the quality of its operation in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels diseases, demonstrated philosophically, which would be sharpened in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	 And know, children, that they disagree about the time in which it is suitable to perform cautery, and they consider springtime to be the best time for this.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	 And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the damage caused by accidental timing is overcome by the benefit of what can be achieved with cautery, and especially if the cautery is for painful or necessary pains, strong inflammations, and fistulas, which do not tolerate delay, lest something worse happens.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	 This does not matter in your opinion, or, children, only the common people and foolish doctors think this way, since with that illness which is healed by cautery there is always a recurrence, and they consider that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	 And the cause is not at all as they think because of this, since cautery is only used in places where medicine cannot reach and it dries up the humors which are the cause of the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	 But nevertheless, cautery surpasses medicine in terms of swiftness and effectiveness of its operation and the great skill of its practitioner.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	 And it is possible that the illness may return at some point in time, depending on the patient's constitution, the location of the illness, and the practitioner's skill, as well as what has been prepared in the patient's body regarding an accumulation of superfluidities, and what has been received by the patient through his diet and similar causes. However, if the illness for which cautery is administered is a subtle illness with few superfluities and humors, such as cautery for toothache and similar cases, it is possible that the pain may not return in that area. But this is done only in small areas.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	 And it is commonly said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this statement is true, for I do not consider anything else to be effective with medicine or any other cause before cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	 And the reason is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when the methods of treatment in certain diseases are administered, and those medicines do not succeed, and then at the end of the cause one administers cautery, and it proves effective for that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	 Therefore, from this we understand that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which I believe the common people and many foolish doctors hold.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	 And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the similarity of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	 They said that the site of cautery does not produce a scar, although this is not absolutely true, because I have seen and found that it does so only in certain bodies without others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you make cautery with fire and with gold, it is not declared to you, for it ignites according to the quantity that you want by the friction of the gold, and because it prepares to receive a blow; and if you place the fire on it, the gold melts from the heat, and some leaves fall into the fire due to the artifice of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	 And for this, cautery with an iron must be done very gently and precisely in order to perform the operation correctly.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	 And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to the chapters, and I have arranged those from the head to the feet, so that I may clearly show the questioner what he wants.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	 Of the cautery for headache caused by cold and dampness.
Le capitol primier.	 The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	 This cauterization is used for cold and dampness, which are the causes of many diseases, such as headaches, excessive sweating, known as profuse sweating from the head to the temples and behind the ears, dizziness, toothache, sore throat, and generally all illnesses caused by cold, including paralysis, swelling, stroke, and similar conditions in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	 The method of this cauterization is as follows: first, instruct the patient to use a purgative medicine to cleanse the head for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	 And then instruct them to shave their head with a razor, and then make that person sit between your hands on a low bench, and let them place their hands on their feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	 And now, place the palm of your hand near the bridge of his nose between his eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	 But once your hand has reached the middle of his forehead, mark that spot with a stylus, and then ignite the cautery olive, which looks like this:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	 And then place it on the marked spot, in such a way that it descends, with your hand holding it tightly and turning it slowly.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	 And then slightly lift your hand and look at the spot, and if you see any part of the bone exposed, even as small as a grain of wheat, then lift your hand. If not, place your hand back with that iron, or another one, if it has become cold, until you see what I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	 And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot and let it sit for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	 And then place a soaked cloth on him, and leave it there until the scar of the burn is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat the spot with Tetrapharmakon ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	 And they also say that as long as the wound remains open, the better it is for the arm, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	 And some of them said that the cord should be cauterized to the bone, and the cautery should be held until a part of the bone's appearance changes.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	 And then it should be scraped away what is attached to the bone, and then it should be treated.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	 And others said that with the cautery it should reach to the depth, until it presses strongly on the bone, until the bone gives way, and this is the method of making a small incision.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	 And they believed that from that place the vapors of the head are expelled.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	 And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is healed.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	 But in my experience, I have not seen these two types of cautery done at all, except in some men out of fear; and if that is the case, it is better with health as it is, because the head is weakened by the loss of continuity, just as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a weak nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	 And the first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; and with that, one avoids and works for health.
Capitol segon.	 Chapter Two
Del cauteri del cap.	 "About the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	 "When the whole head suffers from chronic and prolonged pain in the patient, and uses of garlands, combs, head-purges, plasters, bandages, hairnets, girdles, and similar remedies have been attempted, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that is not suitable or does not benefit the patient, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution by nature; and if it is not fragile and finds great coldness, then cauterize that part with another cautery, leaving that one aside for a while.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	 "Then cauterize that [part of the head] with a cautery until the sinew is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	 "After cutting the sinew and exposing the bone to the extent we have described, cauterize that [part] with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called 'vas' – and this is the location where cupping is done.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	 "And be careful in this, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find a very different pain from the pain of all other head cauteries.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	 "And I say this because the cautery that is used for the horns of the head and the occiput should be finer than the one used for the middle part of the head; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	 Capítulo tercero. (Chapter three)
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	 About the cauterization of new migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	 When pain occurs at the top of the head or when the pain extends to the eyes, evacuate with cleansing medications and administer other treatments as I have mentioned in the discussions on illnesses; if that does not help, then cauterization is performed in two ways: either by cauterizing with a sharp burning medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	 However, cauterizing with a burning medicine is done by taking a piece of wool, scraping it and tying off the ends from both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	 Then immediately cut the painful area on the temple with a sharp needle until it is deeply buried under the skin, so that it remains hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	 Then press on it with a bandage to stop the bleeding and leave it for three hours; then remove it and pull out the wool, and let the wound remain open for two or three days, and then place a cloth soaked in wine vinegar over it until the area heals.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then continue treating it with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	 And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And for the cauterization with iron according to this method, use fire for the cautery of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	 and it is called a nailhead, because its tip is shaped like the head of a nail, which has some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	 Then place it over the area of pain and hold your hand steady so that the iron is not shaken and rotate the iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	 And if the quantity that is shaken by the speed of the cord is such that most of it is shaken, lift your hand to ensure that the iron below is not shaken so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 Then soak a cloth in salt water and place it over the area, leaving it there for three days; then place a clean cloth with an edge, and then treat with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	 And if you want to, cauterize with the tip of the knife according to this method, and be careful not to cut an artery in this particular newness.
Capitol quart.	 Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	 On the cauterization of old migraine.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	 When you are treating migraines with the water we mentioned in the previous treatment, and as stated in the divisions of illnesses, if the treatment is not effective and sometimes due to the severity of the illness, the first cautery with medicine or fire does not suffice, then it is necessary for you to heat the surgical knife until it is white-hot. This signifies on the painful area with a line as long as your little finger; and pause your hand for one moment and press it until you reach the vein and penetrate into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	 However, it is necessary for you to be cautious about the continuation of the jawbone, which is greatly affected by chewing, and that the muscle connected to it is not damaged and the nerve connected to it does not cause pain, and that a spasm does not occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	 And if it concerns the caution and care of blood flow from the artery that is cut, for in its cutting there is danger, and especially to those who do not know what they are doing and are not skilled or experienced; leave the operation at this point.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	 And I come to remind you of the regulation of blood flow from the vein according to its method, in its place within this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 And if from this illness the patient does not benefit from this cautery and you see that the patient's body is able to tolerate it, then cauterize them in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	 And if you see, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on archery with cautery having two blades, and this is a better and more beneficial cauterization.
Capitol .v.	 Chapter 5
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	 On the Cauterization of Earache.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	 When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with laxatives and other treatments that I have mentioned earlier, but the pain does not go away, then apply heat to the cautery. This type of cautery is called "punctum," and its form is as follows:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	 And then pierce near the heat source, and guide it around the entire ear like a wheel that is turning, or around each part of the ear if the pain is in a specific part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	 Approach with the cautery from behind the ear, little by little, until you feel the spot with your finger.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	 And if the cautery of those points is done on the entire ear and it heals, then also treat the spots until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	 Chapter 6
De cauterizacio de turtura.	 On the Cautery of Torture
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	 Torture that is healed and cauterized is not only due to the species that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	 Avoid cauterization of the species that cause dryness or nerve spasm.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	 When you treat that species of torture with jars and purgatives and gargles, and your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little below its temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	 And place your cautery in opposition to the afflicted area, for softening occurs only in the region that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	 And the way to perform the cautery is to cauterize it with a cautery at the right end of the ear, slightly above the horn of the head, and another on the temple, whose length should be according to the length of the little finger, and hold your hand with the cautery until the amount of half the thread is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	 And this is the form of the cautery, which is a species of the knife, the shape of which is before you (or the table).
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	 But however, it is more delicate than that one a little bit like bladders; and it is necessary that the blade in it lacks some of its excess thickness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	 Then care for the area with water that has been processed ahead of time until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	 Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	 On the Cauterization of Old Apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	 When apoplexy is old and you treat it with the water we have mentioned and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize them with four cauteries: on all the corners of their head; and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	 And the manner of the cautery is made according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	 And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is even more urgent; and then it should be treated with processed water.
Capitol .viii.	 Chapter VIII
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	 On the Cauterization of Forgetfulness caused by a Flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	 It is necessary that large cups and purifying pills be given to the patient at the beginning.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	 And next, shave the entire head of the patient and place on his temples the plaster made from wax as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	 And repeat this several times, for that is the manner of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	 And do so according to the order of that doctor which I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	 And so if by these means the patient is cured, good; and if not, then make three cauteries on the lower part of his head, which should descend from the highest part of the head to the lowest part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	 And place the thickness of a finger between each cautery, and then cure the cautery with the aforementioned water.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	 But if the patient has an addition (of a limb or other body part), and is tolerating it well, then make a cautery in the middle of that addition; and if the addition is larger, then make the cautery on both sides of the horns (or corners) of the addition.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	 Then cure it until it is healed; and let the scabs be olive-colored, as described earlier.
Capitol .ix.	 Chapter IX
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	 Of the Cauterization of Paralysis and the Softening of the Entire Body
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	 Then proceed in the cleansing of the head with jars and the aforementioned water; and next, shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with cauteries in the middle of the head, and with cauteries on all the corners of the head, and with cauteries on the lower part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	 And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body due to excess humors and the patient tolerates it and the illness is strong, then burn with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and continuously with a cautery until the fluid runs out from under them, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	 And care for him until he is healed, and this should be cauterized well.
Capitol .x.	 Chapter 10
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	 On the Cautery of Epilepsy
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	 Do not cauterize an epileptic unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	 Therefore, it is necessary to purge the brain at the beginning with years and with the other cure that we have said in the division when the illness is great and tolerates the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	 And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer gargles and chewables that purge, doing this for several days with the improvement of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	 And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the aforementioned manner, and with another cautery on his occiput, and over each corner of the head, cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	 And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then apply cautery with pointed tools as mentioned before, ensuring that there is a state of relaxation and softness in the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	 And then proceed with the olive-oil cautery as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	 However, if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery in this manner.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter XI
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	 On Cauterizing Melancholy
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	 When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and thick phlegm, then apply cautery with the pointed tools we have mentioned, ensuring there is paralysis present.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	 And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that inclines towards melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them water to drink that purifies their brain as described earlier in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	 Then shave the patient's head, and make a decently-sized tonure from the hair, and place it in the middle of their head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	 And let the patient be seated and held on all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	 Then apply a liniment; and it is most appropriate to use old sheep's wool for this purpose.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	 And warm that one over a controlled fire, with measured heat, which he will bear when it is applied to him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	 And place that one in the middle of his head within the circle, and let it enter until he is numbed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	 And do this with the patient once a week, along with his other treatment, until he is healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that area making small points according to his size, unless you have the hand with a cautery arranged in this way: this is the type of cautery that moistens the brain evenly.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	 And then place that area covered in cloth or gauze.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter XII
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	 On the cauterization of water descending into the eye.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	 When it has been determined that the onset of water in the eye is due to the signs mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses his head, and keep him away from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	 And have him take baths in warm water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	 And then instruct him to shave his head, and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of his head; and then cauterize with two cauteries on both temples if the origin of the water is in both eyes, or on one side if it is in one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	 In this context, "incideys" is likely a form of the verb "to incise," meaning to make an incision or cut. "Am" could be short for "ad" or "apud," which means "at" or "near." "Cauteri" refers to the cautery instrument used for burning or cutting. "Totas las venas e arcerias" translates to "all the veins and arteries." "Dejos la codena" means "below the collarbone," referring to the area of the body below the clavicle. "E sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas" suggests that the incisions should be made far away, specifically in the region of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	 And beware of blood flow when cauterized; and if you see blood flow from him, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	 And I will come with wisdom concerning the extraction of arrows and the removal of those, and caution against blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	 And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck between two bones with two well-made cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	 On Cauterizing Old Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	 When tears from the eyes are old and habitual, and through the veins and arteries that are evident on the surface of the head, it is confirmed to be superfluous coldness, then cauterize with the cautery mentioned at the beginning of water falling in the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries in the neck between the two temples, and two cauteries in the neck between the two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	 And if you need to add [more treatment], then cauterize the entire side of the eye towards the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	 Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	 On Cauterizing Nasal Bad Odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	 Sure, here's the translation for the given sentence:
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	 "And then cauterize that area with a pointed iron, using two cauteries on both eyebrows, just below the hairline.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	 "And be careful with the archery so as not to burn that area.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	 "And this is the shape of the pointed iron.
Capitol .xv.	 "Chapter XV
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	 "On the application of a hot cautery to the eyelids for softening them.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar-shaped iron. And this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	 "And if you wish to cauterize that area on both eyebrows a little, use two cauteries in all parts and make them long from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	 "And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	 "And do not press too hard with your hand on the cauteries, but according to the amount that one-third of the eyelid is burned.
Capitol .xvi.	 "Chapter XVI
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	 "On the application of a hot cautery to the eyelid when the hairs are turned inward and push the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	 "When the hairs of the eye are turned inward so that they poke the eye, cautery is done on them in two ways: either by burning or with a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	 If you have a pointed cautery for him with fire, instruct the patient before this that he should shave his hair as those who shave it; until they are prolonged and smoothed; and if you must use that [cautery], then strengthen his fingers with a bandage so that he is not disturbed until the hairs are born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	 When they are born and baptized, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and immediately seal their eyelids with a sign, using a sign that resembles the shape of a maple leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be near the eyebrows.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	 And immediately apply a poultice soaked in egg white or a paste of lentils on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	 And quickly ignite the cautery, which looks like this.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	 And immediately cauterize on the figure that you have marked, little by little, in small patches, until the surface of the skin that looks like a maple leaf is completely burned.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	 And the sign of the healthiness of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs around it raised up from the point of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	 And so lift your hand and leave it for three days, and immediately apply another poultice with a border until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And immediately treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	 But if the hairs return for some reason and the eyelid is softened, then do the cautery again in the same way as you did before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	 But if the eyelashes are in the eyelid, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and is healed, and so that the eyelashes do not touch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 But use the cautery with medicine to burn this as you instruct the patient to pluck out the eyelashes until they are long and healed, and then make a patch of cloth in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	 And then take some well-known soap and about one egg yolk, or if you don't have that, mix these substances together well, and make it quickly so that it does not become cold; and then spread some of this water on the patch made in this way like a myrtle leaf, and place it over one eye or both; and put under the eye a cloth dipped in egg white, and let the patient's head be in your lap.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	 Place the said patch on the medicine and press it gently, without removing it until the patient feels the sting of the medicine, because this sting is like fire in them.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	 And so when they perceive that they have felt the sting, then remove the medicine and leave it with your finger; when the sting ceases, then replace the medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if you see the eyelid is raised as it should be, you can remove the bandage made of fire or incision, because then it will be well; and if not, return the medicine to the place where the medicine was not applied and do not remove it until your operation is healed and the eye contracts.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	 And immediately place your hand on the swollen area until the edema of the fluid is eliminated, and then treat it with a definitive ointment or another until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	 And it is necessary for you to perform your operation with vigilant diligence to ensure that no debris from the medicine falls into the eye. If after several days the eyelid becomes soft and there is some cause of discomfort, then apply the medicine again on that softened part of the eyelid, as you did at the beginning, and keep doing this until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	 And this is how the myrtle leaf looks like.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	 And know that men's eyes are varied according to size and smallness, and therefore your treatment should be made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	 And do not hide the path of truth from those who study this art.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter XVII
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	 On the Cauterization of a Fistula that is in the Lacrimal Duct of the Eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	 When you treat a fistula with the method mentioned in the divisions of diseases and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place their head on your shoulder, and have another person hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it is not moved or agitated with the patient's head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	 And then place a cotton cloth soaked in egg whites or in pigeon droppings over his mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And then ignite the cautery, of which this is the shape:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	 which should be concave, as is the form of a reed or vulture's feather, with one end used to make the cautery.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	 And if you wish, it should be penetrating into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	 And if you want, it can be made like a tentacle.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	 However, that which is concave is better for the intended purpose.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	 And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out of it pus and dry it up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	 And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	 And then place the cautery, which should be well-ignited, over it and with that intended hand a little away from the cautery towards the mouth, so that your hand does not burn or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery on the corners of the mouth and cauterize it. 🔥😷
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	 So if at the beginning of your cauterization you reach the bone, that's good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization once or twice, if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and then place a cotton cloth with border around it and cover it with drying ointment until it is healed. 😷🧪
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	 If 10 days have passed and the patient is not healed, then place on them a sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scraped according to what is suitable in their chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	 And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula that some earlier people mentioned: first apply to the location of the fistula and open it up, then place in that opening a thin string whose shape matches its own; and put in it an amount equivalent to one ounce of melted lead; and take your hand with the thread with good retention, and do not disturb the patient so that the melted lead does not reach the bottom of that; and it is necessary to place on the bottom of the patient's fistula cotton soaked in egg white or water, because the lead heals the location of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	 And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a tracheotomy through the nose and reduce the fistula to the inside of the nose according to its proper location.
Capitol .xviii.	 Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	 On Cauterization of the Fissure of the Buttocks.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	 Frequent cracks occur in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	 Therefore, when you treat those cracks with the water that we mentioned in the divisions and it does not improve your treatment, then burn them with a small pointed cautery like this:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	 And let the cavity of it be according to the delicacy of the needle.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	 Then carefully place this (cautery) in those cracks until it reaches the bottom of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat that with plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter XIX
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	 On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth an abscess develops and then breaks open, and is drained, and heals improperly, creating a fistula, and you treat it and the treatment does not improve, then you must heat a cautery according to the size that fits into the fistula, and insert the heated end into the hole of the fistula, and with your hand guide it until the hot iron reaches its bottom; and at the end do this once or twice; and then treat it with the water we mentioned for the treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	 This translation could be interpreted as: "And so if the wound is cut and healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and extract the rotten bones according to what will follow in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	 Chapter XX
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	 "About the cautery of teeth and the softening of veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	 "When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines but they do not improve, then place the head of the patient on your lap. Quickly ignite the cautery in the shape that will be described next, so that you can place the little tube over the tooth and quickly insert the hot cautery into it, holding your hand a little under so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	 "And then lift your hand, and then apply the cautery several times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	 "And then the patient rinses his mouth with salt water and holds it for an hour, and then stops. For the decayed tooth is secured and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupting moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	 Here is the translation of "Capitol .xxi." into English:
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	 "About cauterizing tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	 "When tooth pain is caused by cold, or if there is a sore or worm in it and you do not heal it with medicine, then cauterize that area in two ways: either cauterize with the edge of a cow's hoof, or cauterize with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	 "Cauterize with the edge by taking the edge of a cow's hoof and burning it in the fire until it is hot, then take cotton and wrap it around the end of the tooth, and immediately immerse that in the heated edge, and place it on the painful tooth quickly until it is cauterized.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	 "And then repeat this process several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	 "And if you wish, dip wool or cotton in the aforementioned edge, and place it on the painful tooth, and then place red-hot iron on top of it until the iron reaches the pulp of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	 "However, cauterization with fire requires that you pay attention to the tip of iron or steel, ensuring it is somewhat blunt so that the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	 And then ignite the cautery in the shape that it will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is heated; do this several times because the pain will be reduced either on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	 It is necessary that by pressing that cautery, the patient fills his mouth with good broth and holds it for an hour, and then spits it out; and this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	 And cauterize with whatever extreme you wish according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	 And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	 On the Cauterization of Extrusions.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	 When extrusions are of phlegm and cold humors, and are not responsive to digestion by medicines, and you wish to promote their slight digestion, then ignite the cautery, whose shape is as follows: it has two openings, one for emitting smoke from the other end of the cautery. Place this heated cautery on the swelling once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the depth of the swelling.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	 And if the swelling is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and let it remain for three days, and place a compress on it soaked in broth until what the fire has burned off is reduced.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for him with ointments, poultices, and cloths until he is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	 And the shape of the cannula or cautery should be conveyed in this way.
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	 On cauterizing a raw throat and constriction of the throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	 When moisture comes over the channel of the lung, and especially when it is with coldness of pleurisy, then the patient should be evacuated at first with laxative medicines, and afterwards you must cauterize him in the root of the throat in the depressed place.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	 And beware that you do not penetrate with the cautery into the throat nor burn too much of its skin, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	 And then cauterize him with another cautery at the joint of the neck on his last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	 And the cautery should be nailed in the same manner as previously mentioned.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 Then care for him with the aforementioned water until he is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	 On cauterizing lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	 When cough and lung disease are due to cold moisture and the patient does not have fever or consumption, and it is an old illness, then you should cauterize him with two cauteries on the furcula in the depressed places, the lion and the cow; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between two nipples; and let the cauteries be nailed according to the aforementioned form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	 And if you wish, let your cautery point be done with the pointed instrument called "punctum," whose form precedes in the cauterization of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	 And make points into these; and then treat it with the water that has been prescribed until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	 And know that the cautery has three ramps because the cauterization is done with it; in one sitting, you can make three cauteries according to this form.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	 On the cauterization of the little finger, which is also called the "cap del ajutori".
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	 When the little finger is dislocated due to slippery moisture and does not stay in place upon returning, you should reduce its dislocation until it returns to normal. Then, by means of a slight movement, it can be relocated as needed. As we have found, this should be done first; afterwards, the patient should be turned over onto their back or side. Then, lift the bone which is in the inner part of the little finger with your left hand to the upper parts if the joint is dislocated upwards.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And now heat the cautery, which has two points; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	 And then burn the cord until it penetrates into the other side; and there will be the shape of a burned mark, as if made by four burning irons.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And this is how you apply subtlety according to the intensity; this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	 And sometimes it fits according to this count, and because there are eight cautery irons.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	 Then cover the cautery point with salt paste, and then make the patient rest quietly, and the member should not be moved for any time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	 And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and this is done later, then burn over the muscle with a hot iron or several pointed irons, because the joint will be strengthened and the moisture will be dried out, and the patient will be cured.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter 26
De cauterizacio del stomac.	 Of Cauterization of the Stomach
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	 When the stomach is afflicted with cold and excessive moisture to the point that it exits from its confines, and many ulcers have formed within it, and if you continue the methods of care without benefit, then the patient must lie on their back, extend their hands and feet, and then burn in that area with three irons: one iron below the foot for the width of a finger with a pointed iron, and two irons below each side of the spine of the iron, so that it forms a triangular shape; and ensure that those which are not adjusted will cause blistering.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	 And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the tendon.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	 And let the shape of the cautery be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and let this be a cautery in the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	 And let the stomach be cauterized by pricking at that place which is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you know on the stomach, point according to the quantity that you wish with a probe, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the points; and then treat that with the preceding treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	 On the cauterization of cold feet.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	 When pain occurs in the feet due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness until its normal consistency is disrupted by excessive evacuation, and the patient is treated with the water we have mentioned and not given food, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back, and feel with a probe three cauteries of this form and quantity, placing them under the feet near the hypochondrium, where the supine position of a man is.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	 And let there be a space between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	 And do not press your hand too much with the cauteries.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	 And if the amount of water that is held matches the amount of half the length of a cord, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit down, who has already spread out their thighs, and raised their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	 And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	 And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a pointed knife, when you have the skill and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	 And be careful not to proceed too much with the cauterization, and let the length of the entire cord be held so that it can encompass the whole body and reach into the intestines, for the cord is thin here; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter .28
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	 Of the Perforation of a Foot Aposteme with a Cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	 When an abscess or aposteme appears on the foot and you want to know if that aposteme is in the flesh of the foot or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will experience heaviness and pain without acuteness.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	 And if it is in the tunic of the lung, with great and sometimes painful sharpness, exhausting even the most experienced physicians' care for him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	 Therefore, it is necessary that the patient be placed on his side; and then mark the location of the abscess with a knife; and then heat the cautery which resembles a needle, whose shape has been described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	 And cauterize with that and the cautery until all the pus is burned away, until it reaches the base, until healthy flesh appears.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	 Then treat this wound like other abscesses until it heals.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	 And it is not necessary to use this method of cautery except for that which has been taught in the art of medicine and which most physicians know; but this one has been tried on some patients, nevertheless leave that to us, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter XXIX
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	 On Cauterizing Plague Sores
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	 The ancient physicians said that cautery of plague sores should be done in this manner: you should take a dry long needle from the roots of aristolochia, which is pointed and found at the end, and it should be as thick as a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	 And it is not necessary that you grasp the cautery with your hand, but rather it should be held in the open part of the chain in action.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	 And some of the ancients used to say that there are certain men who use a cautery made of iron similar to a ray and ignite it, placing it in the area between the ribs until they reach the abscess with it and expel the pus, as we have said about the foot abscess.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	 But in this perforation with a cautery, there is fear, because one can die immediately if it happens at the location of an unhealed fistula.
Capitol .xxx.	 Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	 On the cauterization of the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	 When you treat the spleen ailment with the treatment we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not help, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are correct, one of which is that you make three or four cauteries along the length of the spleen according to the figure of the foot's cauteries, the shape of which has been previously discussed.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	 And there should be a space the width of a finger or slightly more between each cautery, and the manner of cauterization should be the same as we have said for the foot's cauteries.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	 And do not press your hand with the cautery; and let the patient be face up on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	 And another way to cauterize is to heat the cautery with two openings, as mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the chain that is at the back, towards the left side of the patient's bed.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	 And let your elevation with which you raise the chain be according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	 Then promptly insert the two openings, heated well, into that opening where you will pass the chain through from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	 And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries have been made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	 And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three openings.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	 And then you care for the cautery, since it has been left to throw fire for too many days, because it is more convenient than the other previous causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter 31
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	 On Cauterizing Hydrocephalics
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	 Do not make cauteries in hydrocephalics except specifically in the bladder.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	 When you treat the dropsical with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not match up, then it is necessary for them to be cauterized with four cauteries around the navel and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on the liver, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	 And the depth of the cautery should be appropriate to the thickness of the cord.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	 And then leave the cautery open so that it may seep for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	 And do not evacuate the patient of treatment near the cautery with water that is necessary so that two intentions are added to him, and it will be quickly healed with the help of health.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	 The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be pointed according to what was said above, and it should be oval in shape for those who are cauterized on the back as stated previously.
Capitol .xxxii.	 Chapter .xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	 On the cautery of the feet and the hips.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	 When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with water, you should cauterize the feet on the back of the foot, specifically in the area between the little finger (auricular) and the ring finger (anular). Raise your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; then raise your hand further without completely withdrawing it, because the dropsy water will surge.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	 It is the cautery in this manner: And then make two cauteries on each side, and on each side, make a cautery with the point of a scalpel-like cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	 And the cautery should be according to the length of the side: one above the ankle and the other in the middle part of the side; and on each side, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	 And leave the wound open without dressing for a long time so that any water may surge from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	 And then treat with those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	 On the cauterization of the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	 When the abdomen is affected by cold and moisture to such an extent that it weakens the powers, which are the digestive and retentive powers located in the stomach and intestines, it is treated with various methods of treatment and regimens. Sometimes the patient may suffer from cauterization due to a disturbance of these powers. In such cases, cauterize them with a large cautery on their stomach, as has been mentioned earlier in the cauterization of the stomach, with a circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel, with a subtle nail-like cautery; and with a cautery on the umbilicus, either one large or two.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	 Here's my attempt to translate the given sentence:
Capitol .xxxiv.	 **Capítulo xxxiv.**
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	 Sobre la cauterización de hemorroides crónicas.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	 Cuando las hemorroides crónicas son causadas por fríos humores gruesos o humedades corrompidas, y no se curan con el tratamiento descrito anteriormente, entonces cauteriza con tres cauterios en el pus debajo de la espina del hueso sacro, pequeño y triangular; y un cautery encima del ombligo, que cae por dos dedos.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	 Y si sospechas que el estómago del paciente está enfriado y su comida no digerida, y su cara pálida, entonces cauteriza con un gran cautery sobre el estómago como se describe anteriormente; y un cautery sobre la espalda, y otro cautery sobre el bazo del paciente con un cautery agudo. Deja los cauteries abiertos durante algún tiempo y luego cuida al paciente hasta que se recupere.
Capitol .xxxv.	 **Capítulo xxxv.**
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	 Sobre la cauterización del absceso cerca de su orificio.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	 Cuando abres un absceso, entonces calienta el cautery que se parece a un rayo.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	 Based on the given translation style and context, here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And do this once or twice, for if the hemorrhoids are too many, then cauterize each of them as we have mentioned, and afterwards treat them with that which you find suitable from the ointments until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	 And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any part of the body, it is more helpful afterwards.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 Chapter .xxxvi
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	 On the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	 When nature does not comply with the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, let him be healed with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	 Therefore, when someone has a fistula that occurs naturally afterwards and it is old, it exudes pus and corrupt humors from them. Hence what is more appropriate is to probe it with a fine probe, and then determine the depth of it with the aforementioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	 Then heat the cautery that resembles a reed.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	 And then place this heated cautery into this fistula, according to the depth at which you inserted the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 And repeat with the cautery on that area until the corrupt flesh is burned, either once or twice or three times, depending on your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	 And beware of the burning of nerves and veins; or if there is a fistula in the bladder or intestines, then beware of all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place where you believe it will not penetrate further.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 Then care for the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	 And if the area is sealed, and all the matter has been removed from it, and it remains thus for a long time, then know that it is entirely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	 And if the matter is not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating either into the bone or the flesh is corrupting, or this comes from those causes which will be remembered in their place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	 Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	 Of the Cautery of Hemorrhoids
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	 When there is pain in the hemorrhoids due to cold or large swelling, and because of this the patient's blood is thinning, then you should cauterize that part with a cautery on each hemorrhoid, using a pointed claw from which you take the memory.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	 And strongly cauterize with the second one a little lower, so that three lined cauteries will come, and thus they will be more useful in assistance.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Based on the given pattern of translation, here's how you might approach translating "Capitol .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	 "On the Cauterization of the Bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	 "When debility and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize in the area just below the bladder, where the hairs of the penis begin. Cauterize with a cautery on the right side, and with another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	 "And let the length of each cautery be according to the number of fingers of the patient's hand; and cauterize with a cautery in the area just below the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	 "And let the cautery be thin according to the process.
Capitol .xxxix.	 "Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	 "On the Cauterization of the Uterus.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	 "When the uterus is affected by cold and moisture, such that conception is impeded and the menses are corrupted, delayed, and cause severe pain upon their arrival, then the area should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery just below the back, or with two cauteries, and let the cauteries be thin.
Capitol .xl.	 Capítulo XL
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	 Chapter 40: Cauterization for Dislocation of the Ankle
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	 When moist mucus is poured into the ankle area, causing it to move from its place, a sign of this is that one part extends over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	 And the location of the dislocation is found in the swollen spot.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	 Therefore, you must cauterize the patient over the ankle area with a round, pointed cautery, because you will have sensed it with your probe in the circle of the area as it turns, and for this reason, the area falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	 And the cautery should be similar to the one used in stomach cauterization.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	 If this cautery is not available, then cauterize with three large olive-shaped cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And the cautery should be done according to the thickness of the entire cord; and then care for it so that it heals properly.
Capitol .xli.	 Chapter XLI.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	 On the Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	 When pain is felt in the ankle area and its cause is cold and moisture, the patient should be treated with the water we have mentioned before, and if that does not help, it means the remedy has lost its potency. In this case, you must rid the patient of thick humors using either foul-smelling pills or artificial pills, and then cauterize them.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	 And the method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: cauterization with burning medicines or cauterization with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	 According to two known methods, one of which is to cauterize the patient on the wider part of their body with three triangular cauteries as shown in this way; and make them go deep.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	 And the space between each cautery should be the size of a finger's thickness, whether the cauteries are small or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	 But sometimes the cauteries should be placed in the middle of the back of the neck, because there are four cauteries there.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	 And if you wish, you can cauterize with a circle that precedes the form in the cauterization of the displaced neck, and let it be a continuous circle that burns the tip of the entire spine.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	 And this is the method of cauterization for sciatica when pain is confined to the neck and does not extend into the chest.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	 But if it extends into the chest, then cauterize with two cauteries on the chest in the place where the patient feels pain; and with one cautery on the shoulder four fingers below the wild part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	 And if you use a knife-shaped cautery, let its depth be according to the thickness of the cord.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	 And if the patient reports that the pain has spread to another part of the body near the feet, then cauterize that area with a cautery in three or four points, or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	 And if the patient reports feeling pain beneath the thumb towards the wrist, then cauterize that area with a knife-shaped cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	 And be careful in all cauterization that you do not penetrate so deeply with the cautery as to burn nerves or major blood vessels, for this could cause harm or contraction on the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	 And I have seen one or two cases where the cautery was applied to the ankle and in the process of cauterization, the flame swelled up until the tumor reached the foot, which was then punctured and entirely corrupted.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	 And immediately afterward, there was a severe attack of diarrhea, and then death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	 And if the pain is in two places at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	 And wise men have said in the cauterization of water, the method is as follows: make it similar to a circle of iron, whose circumference is half the size of a palm; and let its orifices be according to the thickness of a thumbnail or a little less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Here's the translation of your provided sentence:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	 And so cauterize him with three round cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then leave him for three days; then bandage him with a cloth and leave the wound open for many days; and then treat him with ointments until he is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	 Said Al-Zahrawi: O children, we have used this type of cautery little because of the fear of watching it, and because few have been found who take care of it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	 But for those who have endured these cauteries, they will find comfort with them.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	 But the cautery with adherent medicines is that you should make two circles, having a small hole in which they place the iron pin; let the length of the wall be two inches or so in height.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	 And if the space that is between each of them equals the thickness of the finger; and they are open below and above, and they contain each other in this manner:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	 Then place the patient lying on their left side over the wound, and press your hand over the wound; then take hot water and pour it between the two circles, and gradually increase its heat, and keep it for the duration of an hour, and the patient will endure the pain and swelling — because that feels like a fire bite — until the pain subsides.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	 And then lift your hand with the instrument and wash away all the hot water from the wound with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	 And then let it be for three days and place a bandage on it until the blackness of the bruise is removed, and let it be like this for some days, and it will run with pus; this is in case of help.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	 And if the pain extends into the hip or thigh, make for him a statue that contains water, just as it is done in the wound likewise.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	 And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	 Recipe for alkali and quicklime, not extinguished, one part of each, mix them and place in a new bowl, from which the bottom is pierced by a small hole, according to the amount that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	 And place under the bottom of the bowl another inverted bowl, and pour over that alkali and live quicklime cold water which covers them by about a finger's width, and after you have pressed these with a clean hand for good compression, let the hole release the sharp water on the part below to the inverted bowl.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	 And promptly adjust all that water and pour it over another living thing and another renewed alkali because it will have a very strong acidity at that time, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of other members because it is a fiery operation.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	 And from some of the medicines with which one is cauterized, such as the tea tree and honey from anacardium, and also soap of this kind that they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	 And Valerius recounts from an ancient man the operation and treatment with which sciatic pain and venous pain are cured, and he greatly recommends it as being very effective, and says that no other treatment is necessary, because it is healed once like this, because when he enters the bath and urinates, he leaves immediately from that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	 And it is that green nettle be taken, and if green cannot be found, then fresh figs should be taken; and both should be crushed with a little salt and placed on the pain in the ankle or knee or thigh, and bound.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	 And it should be left for three hours or however long the patient feels relief from the application.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	 And then place him in a bath and as soon as his body is reddened, immerse him in the ground, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	 And know that it is not necessary to use a cautery with these medications except during the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	 However, Escorides says that when the vein is cauterized with goat's blood, it is beneficial to him; and let the cautery be done in this manner: let wool be taken and soaked in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and in the hollow.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	 And then take dry goat's blood and flambé it with fire until it becomes charcoal; and then place it on the wool and let it burn until it is spread out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	 And then repeat this process, and do not stop doing so until the sensation of the bite reaches the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	 And this manner of cautery is called "cautery with cows".
Capitol .xlii.	 Chapter 42
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	 On the Cauterization for Back Pain
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	 Sometimes pain occurs in the back due to various causes, such as a fall or blow, or excessive purging, and for similar reasons, due to the influx of cold and moist material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	 And the cautery is not used except for this specific case, which is caused by the escape of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	 Therefore, it is necessary to evacuate the patient with fused pills and similar substances, which should be made on the back where the pain is located, in three lines according to the size of the patient. After that, place ten cauteries in each line, or more if needed, depending on the patient's tolerance and strength.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	 And this should be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	 And if you wish, cauterize with three or four clover-shaped cauteries in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	 Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	 On Cauterization at the Beginning of Jaundice
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	 This disease frequently occurs in young children; and the sign of its onset in children is that it affects their structure, causing fever and restlessness.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	 And you will find swelling at the last vertebra of the spine and on its back, which begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	 Therefore, when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery in this manner:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	 That he take the cautery over all parts of the spine equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	 And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery two or three lines (inches).
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	 And let the points be close together (between each other).
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	 And then care for the place so that it is healed with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	 But beware that cautery is not administered on a swelling caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	 Chapter XLIV
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	 On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	 And therefore, when gout caused by cold is cured with treatment and the pain is not removed, then remove (cauterize) the remaining (pain).
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	 And you should cauterize that area around the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And let it be cauterized with an olive-shaped instrument, which has this form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	 And if you need to use cautery tools, then use them, but do not press too hard with the cautery in your hand; rather, only surround the area with the tip of the instrument.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	 And if the pain extends into the spine and back, then administer the cautery that we mentioned in its respective chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	 And if the pain is only in the hands, and it is called gout, then puncture in the circles of the wrists as they rotate, puncturing in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	 And if pain remains in the fingers, then puncture in the circles of the wrists on each joint and at the base of the thumb.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	 And if the pain extends after some days to the shoulders or arms, then cauterize each of them in every part of the joints.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	 And you do not cleanse the patient with good diet and medication, because if proper care is taken and heat is evacuated by this cautery, it will heal, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	 Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	 On Cauterizing Wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	 When an incision is made in the abdomen and intestines protrude through the hernia, and this begins to happen, then you must tell the patient to stop eating for that day and use gentle remedies so that the opening of their belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	 "And then follow the patient with your hands on their back, and instruct them to keep their arm inside until the hernia or the intestine is expelled.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	 "And then return to that with your words and signals, trying the break above the bone of the little finger, signaling the end of which is similar to half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 "And then ignite the cautery whose form is as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	 "until it becomes red hot and sparks are produced.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	 "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	 "And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, and another servant should be on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	 "And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and press until you feel the bone of the little finger in the middle of the depression; and repeat this action another time if you did not succeed in the first attempt to reach the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	 And observe carefully the movement of the intestine at the time of your cautery, to ensure that you do not burn the intestine, which could cause death or another serious illness in the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	 And know that when using the cautery, avoid the bones; doing so will ensure the success of your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	 And it is important that the cautery for children be delicate according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	 And carefully clean the area of the cautery for three days with bandages until the scab from the burn is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for him with other ointments until he is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	 And let the patient lie on their back for forty days, so that the wound and the sore may be sealed. xspace
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	 And it is important to feed the patient according to the duration of their treatment, so that their stomach does not swell and the intestines do not protrude due to the effort of healing. xspace
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	 And when it comes time for him to rise after about forty days, then administer a moderately made poultice, and let him have that for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	 And he should abstain from labor and excessive eating and drinking, and from loud voices, for when he follows this complete regimen of healing, he will be cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	 It seems like the text is discussing medical procedures related to abdominal ruptures or hernias. Let's translate it line by line:
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	 And some have said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is indicated by a probe.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	 And a line is placed through the latitude in the back above the rupture, and another line above that; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	 Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	 On the Cauterization of Hernia.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	 When pain in some members persists due to bruising or blows and that pain continues for a long time without improving with medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	 And let the cautery be for every member according to its size and smallness, and its strength and weakness, and the location of the hernia and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	 Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for it is customary for those pains to be connected from one member to another that is close to it, so you should obtain them all with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	 This phrase appears to be about the process of cauterization used to treat leprosy. A literal translation would be:
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	 "Some cases of leprosy are treated with a cautery for great benefit, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	 "So when you want to cauterize such a patient, consider if the leprosy is universal and has been treated with the water we mentioned in the division. If it doesn't improve, be afraid that the corruption will spread throughout the patient's body and all its parts. Then cauterize the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another below it, reaching to the hairline; two on the temples; and one at the back, either on the nape or the neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	 "Finally, press with your hand and the cauteries a little deeper until they leave an indentation on the bone, so that the release of thick vapors may be relieved from him; and cauterize the spleen as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	 "And if the leprosy has already spread across the patient and appears clearly, then you should cauterize with those cauteries that we have mentioned for the head; and cauterize at the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on each cheekbone, and with two cauteries on both vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with one large one on the vertebrae near the buttocks, and one on the buttock, and with two on each ankle, and with one on each ankle bone, and with two on each kneecap, and with one on each kneecap, and with two on each elbow, and with two on each shoulder blade, and with two on each rib cage; and cauterize all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on each heel of the feet, and on the soles of the hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	 And be careful of the nerves that are on the sole [of the foot], so that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	 And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the knee and with another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the groin.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	 And know that the more precisely you apply the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery itself, as others do, because his body is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	 And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and the joints, as has been said about the kinds of tools. 
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And then care for the cautery with flour mixed with honey and with other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	 Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	 On the Cauterization of Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	 When some member is paralyzed or numb and has been treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you should cauterize that paralyzed member with cauteries according to the size of the member, whether large or small.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	 And let your cautery enter a little into the tip of the spine.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And then you should care for him with an ointment until he is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	 And sometimes the swelling is cauterized in certain places where there are many nerves that control that member, and when the swelling is removed, it alleviates the pain.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	 But one should not venture into this unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the members and the pathways of the nerves throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	 Chapter XLIX
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	 On the Cauterization of Warts that are Formed.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	 When warts are old and do not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize it with a pointed cautery for a short while, according to the size of the wart's head, until its whiteness and color disappear and its color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	 And then you should care for it with a mixture of barley flour and lentils with rose oil and with leaves of mullein, and with pigeon blood or swallow blood, each should be one part and all should be mixed together, and then a cloth should be dipped in it and placed on the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	 Chapter L
De cauterizacio de cranc.	 "On the Cauterization of Crabs.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	 When cancer begins and you wish to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as if it were surrounded.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	 And the wise have said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the location; but I have not seen this done, because I fear that an ulcer may form, and I have seen this happen sometimes.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	 And it is more appropriate to cauterize around the circumference with a circle as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Capitol .li.	 Chapter 2.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	 "On the Cauterization of Ailments.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	 When some ailment is delayed in healing, and this is due to the excess of moisture causing it, or due to the patient's condition, whether old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of the time, and you wish to hasten the healing of the ailment; then cauterize around it with many small pointed cauteries; and then leave it alone, for it will hasten in healing.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	 But if you wish to pierce it with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose shape corresponds to it; and place that in the middle of the ailment until the tip penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you use cautery on that area which is lower down, it will alleviate the arm's pain; and then cure the inside so that it may heal.
Capitol .lii.	 Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	 About the use of caustic substances for cautery.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	 Corrosive is a corruption that walks through the limb, which corrodes it just as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	 Therefore, if you see that corrosive substance in a place where it is suitable to use fire for cautery, then you should apply the cautery needles sparingly and large as appropriate in the area where the corrosion is taking place.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	 And then you should cauterize it entirely from all sides until you have completely eradicated all the corruption and there is no trace left of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	 And then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized areas a poultice made of oil mixed with herbs until all the scabs are completely removed and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	 And then treat it with flesh-regenerating ointment.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	 However, if after three days you see that the flesh has healed healthily and there is no sign of corruption, that is good; but if not, then you should repeat the cautery in the places where the corruption persists.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	 And it is sometimes treated with sharp medicine, because that is similar to cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	 But nevertheless, cautery with fire is a more effective treatment.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	 And I have already stated the treatment for it with sharp medicine in the division section, so take that when you need to start treatment.
Capitol .liii.	 Chapter .53
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	 On the cauterization of scars and similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	 Many times it is seen that the parts below the sick foot are called scars, and they are large and deep, which penetrate the foot; and those are cauterized in two ways: either with fire or with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	 But the cautery with fire is done by heating the pointed cautery similar to an eagle's beak, which should be made of iron according to the size that contains the scar in its entirety, and it should be of fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	 Then place that heated [cautery] on the scar and then turn your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the scar until the cautery reaches the depth of the scar.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	 And leave it like that for three days until it begins to ooze pus.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	 And then apply a poultice to the affected area with wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on it for one night, because that will expel the cause of the pain.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat the area with a generous amount of ointment until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	 And if it does not heal and many little things occur on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer cautery with water. Take a small needle made of iron or steel or feather of a vulture, place it over the nail; then pour into the needle a small amount of hot water, and press with your hand, and turn the needle with the pressure of your hand in all directions, and press the edge of the needle into the root of the nail, and find that the hot water will reach the core of the root of the nail; let the patient wait for an hour for the burn of the hot water, and then remove it, because the nail with its roots will be expelled.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	 And do likewise with all the others until you have treated each and every one of them on the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	 "And then care for those boils whose causes are removed with ointments that the flesh generates.
Capitol .liiii.	 This seems to be a chapter or section header, likely "Chapter 53" in modern English. The full sentence might read: "Chapter 53 begins here," or "This is Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	 "On the Cautery of Tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	 "When someone has a tremor due to cold in the nerves or because of a fever caused by cold, or for any similar reason, then you should cauterize them with four cauteries or five on the backbones of their spine, one between each vertebra; and with cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, using olive-sized cauteries.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	 "And the tremor will subside, hastening the health of the cold illness.
Capitol .lv.	 "Chapter 55.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	 "On Cautery for Sudden Ailments of the Body
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	 "When there are sudden pustules and abscesses on the body that are made from thick corrupted materials, then at the beginning when they appear, it is necessary to cauterize over the head of each abscess with a subtle cautery with a mirtle wand, whose tip is extended with fire; or with a long herestology razor; or with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	 And sometimes it is cauterized with ammonium at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and if they are not believed, and the excess is broken by those actions, then they heal from that.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	 But nevertheless, it is important that this be done in conjunction with an evacuation using bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.	 Chapter 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	 On Cauterization of the Flow of Blood Caused by an Archer's Cut.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	 Often the flow of blood caused by an arrow cut should be stopped at the wound itself or at the beginning of a collection of pus or cauterization of the limb, and similarly in other cases, for it is difficult to stop that otherwise.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	 So when this happens to someone, you must immediately clamp the wound with your hand at the opening of the arrow cut, and place a finger on it, pressing firmly until the bleeding stops under your finger, and it does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	 And then place the olive-shaped cauteries, both small and large, in the fire by the dozens, and blow on them until they are very hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	 And then take one of them, either small or large, according to the place and the wound in which the artery is broken, and quickly apply it to that vein after you have removed your finger, holding the cautery until the blood is sealed and restricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	 And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove the thread and extract the cautery, then take another cautery quickly from those that are prepared in the fire, and do not stop doing this until the bleeding is controlled.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	 And be careful not to burn the nerves here, lest it bring upon the patient another evil.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	 And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding except by one of four methods: either with a cautery as we have said, or with extraction if it has not been extracted already, for when it is extracted its extremities are best burned and the blood is stopped; or let it be bound with pitch or ligature by strong restriction, or place upon it medicines whose virtue is to stop bleeding; and they should be applied firmly with a pad under moderate compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	 But he who administers a decent restriction with ligature and strong bandage or by the position of causes that burn and are similar, should do so only late.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	 But if this is necessary for someone and neither the physician nor medicine is present, then open with a thread tied over the orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand that it must be done with great compression until the blood is stopped from the main source of the wound, and the thread on the artery should not be removed; and over the artery let it be sprinkled with very cold water until the blood is frozen and thickened; and beware that there will be a need for cautery or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	 Start the second section.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	 Of incisions and perforations, and of fistulas, and of phlebotomy, and of wounds and their likenesses.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	 These are the words of Al-Zahrawi (Abulcasis).
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	 We have said in the first chapter all the sicknesses for which it is appropriate to use cautery with fire and corrosive medicine, and the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments necessary for this purpose; and I have ordered the chapters from the top of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	 And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that it may be helpful to those who seek it, when they ask about it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	 And before I begin this, son, you should know that in this chapter is included everything that is in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	 And because it is necessary to have great caution in this, for the operation which is performed in this chapter is very often accompanied by bloodletting, through which life flows, you must be careful with the exposure of the vein or incision over an abscess, or opening of a fistula, or cleansing of a wound, or extraction of an arrow or cutting into a stone and their likenesses.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	 And among all those, fear and trembling are accompanied by death in most of them.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	 And I warn you that this should not happen to you, as some people have encountered various forms of madness.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	 And of them there are some who go mad with their illness and the death that comes to them is easy, and this because of the severity of what they find in their illness, and because of the length of their illness, and with the illness there is fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	 And among those, there are some who give you their possessions and property, expecting health from you, but their illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	 Therefore, you should not consent to treat those who come to you with this condition; your caution should be greater than your greed; do not presume any cause for it unless you have certain knowledge that justifies it, and only if a praiseworthy outcome results.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	 And use prognosis and diagnosis in the treatment of all your patients, for in this lies your help in acquiring fame and good reputation, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	 Here's my attempt at translating this line:
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	 And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters according to what was previously mentioned in the chapter on cautery, regarding the care of the head to the feet, so that it may be relieved for you, which you request and for which you have need.
Capitol primier.	 Chapter one.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	 Of the treatment of water which is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	 Know that this illness very often befalls infants due to childbirth and when the nurse tightly binds the infant's head without mercy.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	 And sometimes it happens for unknown reasons which are not understood.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	 But I have never seen this illness except in infants; and all those whom I have seen die, and thus it seems to me that it is an abandoned work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	 And I have seen that an infant whose head was full of water had his head always thus enlarged until he could not place himself on top of himself because of the size of his head, and moreover, the moisture made it increase until it killed him by fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	 And this moisture is either added between the membrane and the bone, or it is added below the bone on the brain.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	 Because the operation in that case, if the moisture is between the membrane and the bone and the abscess is small, then it is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head with a slit in the latitude, and let the length of the slit be two nights until the moisture runs out, and this is the shape of the spatula.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 And therefore, if the moisture has increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two slits in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	 And if the moisture is beneath the bone, the sign of this is that you see the sutures of the head open on all sides and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand from within and there is nothing hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	 It is necessary for you to make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	 Then draw out all the moisture through the incision; and then strengthen the slits with cloths and poultices; and then cover it from above with wine and oil for five days, and then remove the bandage and treat the wound with plasters and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	 Based on the given text and your initial translation, here's my attempt to translate this line:
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	 And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause blood to flow, which can lead to the patient's death due to loss of blood with evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	 **Chapter II.**
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	 About the cutting of the arteries that are near the ears, which are called "hilas seysse".
Capitol segon.	 **Chapter Three**
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	 When there is any catarrh or rheum in the eyes or feet and it has become chronic, and you do not get better with medicine, then the final cure for this is to cut those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	 And therefore it is necessary that when you want to cut those [arteries], the patient should raise their head and then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries are revealed. Then strengthen the patient's neck with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulses; and press on the places corresponding to those near the ears, and they will hide in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	 Then sign the artery with a probe and then cut each one with the scalpel divided into sharp parts for cutting, reaching to the bone, and it should be like this due to the size of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	 If you wish, insert the spatula beneath the artery and break it at the points where it is divided on top.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	 And let the length of the incision be two thumbs wide, for when some vein is cut, blood exits with a pulsating flow, which jumps out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	 But if the artery is not visible on the skin, then you should measure from the ear the amount of space equivalent to three thumbs, and then mark it with a probe, and pierce into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	 And the amount of blood to be taken is equal to one-sixth of a pint, and it should not be taken in large or small quantities, and all this depends on the strength of the patient and the fullness of his vein.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 Then consider the wound, and thus if there remains on the bone any cause of splintering, then cut it open so that it does not turn into a cold abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then strengthen the wound with cotton and linen bandages, and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	 Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	 On the Extraction of Arteries Located in the Temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	 When someone experiences an ancient or acute migraine due to humid and acidic qualities in the temples or has a persistent and similar headache and it is not cured by common medical treatments, then we have recourse in these illnesses to extraction of arteries in the temples or cauterization of them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	 And the manner of the operation and extraction is that the patient shaves the hair on their temples; then find the visible artery in the temple, as it has been shown to you by its pulse, which is hidden in most people due to the strength of the cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	 And if it is hidden from you, then have the patient's neck stretched with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or apply hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And then take the instrument of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	 Then use the instrument to carefully separate the skin until you reach the artery; and then insert a thread into it and pull it out in small segments until you have extracted the entire artery from the skin, freeing it from all surrounding tissue.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	 And then evacuate about one to three cups of blood.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	 And if the wound is large, then it is necessary for you to bind it in two places with a double-stranded thread of flax or with long cords, and do not allow it to become infected before the healing of the wound, and let there be a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	 Then cut away the excess that is between two ligaments; do this at that time, or very soon after.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	 And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone with a surgical knife until its edges are cut away, and it will stay in place instead of that same procedure.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	 And this is a better procedure if the patient has a fever or is of hot complexion; because cauterization is one of those things that help to end humidity, and therefore it is better in summer.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	 And it is necessary to quickly clean the wounds and cover them with old cloths, and let powder be applied decently, and then let it be treated with dry medicines that make flesh grow and with compresses until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 And if during your work another time the wound bleeds, then you should hasten to stop that blood, either with a cautery or by filling the place with cotton, and strengthen your hand until the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	 And if none of those causes are present, then place your finger over the wound until the blood is coagulated, and rinse the wound with very cold water until the sharpness subsides, and let it be strengthened as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	 And the easiest way to extract an arrow is by cauterizing the vein with this pointed instrument that has two blades. First, you must mark both spots with a needle, and then apply intense heat until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that what is between the ends is extended, because they are not entirely consolided by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	 And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	 And let the sharpness of the two blades be equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	 However, if the sharpness of the two blades is less, it is better, because if they are as sharp as two blades, it approaches each wound and does not cut the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	 Therefore, since in those there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is held back in them and the flesh is cut slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	 And this method is better for all works and easier.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	 "And let the space between two ribs be as thick as the thumb.
Capitol quart.	 "Fourth chapter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	 "On the care of the body for acute and burning tears of the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	 "When the tears are acidic and it is the body of those veins that are on the top of the head outside, and there is no reason for medicine's care in this, and sometimes the face of the patient has reddened and they feel a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were ants walking, and the eyes of such a person are exhausted, so wet that even their eyelashes are dissolved, and the eyelids are cut by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient doctors in the care of this used this operation, and they named this care with a sponge.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	 "And you order the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three equally spaced incisions on the forehead according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	 "And if the length of the incision is two thumbs: let one incision be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the small movement of the eyelids that are lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	 And beware of the beginning of the veins that are in two places, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	 And if the space of each opening is equal to three times the size stated.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	 And if you have a sponge or dry cloths with which to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	 Then insert a probe with two sharp ends, of which this is the form of the incision on him:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	 which starts from the temples and goes to the second opening.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	 With that, remove all the membrane that is between the two openings, and cut what is above the bone, and then do this from the middle opening to the second opening.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	 Then insert this probe and enter again into the first opening another time with another instrument which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	 And place the sharp side of it against the flesh attached to the membrane, and the dull side against the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	 "But if the incision is extended to the point of appearing on the buttock, then proceed to do so into the middle cleft until it reaches the other cleft.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	 "And if blood is discharged in quantity, press on the places of the blood clots to stop the bleeding.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	 "And then place on each cleft a piece of old cloth, and cover those pieces with powder made from wine, oil, and vinegar, ensuring that it does not turn into an infected abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	 "And on the third day, remove the bandages and administer a large infusion of hot water or tea, and then treat it with an ointment made from basil oil and rosemary oil until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	 "Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	 "On the treatment of scratches by cautery and the ulcers that descend from within the skull.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	 "When someone has sharp and continuous cautery burns, and the patient's ulcers are small and thin, and their vision is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and hairless, and there is severe pain in the front of the head with consequent protrusion, know by these signs that the materials and cautery come only from tiny veins originating within.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	 And the best cure for this is as follows: instruct the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in it at the midpoint of the forehead, a small one based on size (and begin with the left temple incision going towards the right temple; let the incision go into the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples' tendons which are quite sensitive to mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	 Drain all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill between the two lips of the incision with old cotton or linen cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	 And then cover it tightly with powder mixed with wine and oil, so that it does not become an infected abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	 And when you remove that and see that the abscess has already diminished, then it is necessary to scrape the bone until new flesh begins to grow on it, and then cure it with a drying regimen which will cause the flesh to grow, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from them make a poultice and apply it to these wounds for the growth of new flesh.
Capitol .vi.	 Chapter 6
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	 Of the care for those who suffer from earaches.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	 Every cause that afflicts the ears is one of four kinds: either it is a mineral substance or something similar to a stone, such as iron or glass; or it is plant-based, such as barley or beans; or it is a fluid substance, such as water and vinegar or their likenesses; or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	 Therefore, when a stone or another cause similar to the ones mentioned above enters the ear and does not fit or grow in it, place the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, then apply some oil of violets or sesame oil onto it. Then administer its extraction, make the patient sneeze by holding their nose until they sneeze.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	 Then place some weights of cloth or wool around the circumference of the ear and stretch the ear in those parts above, because many times it is dislodged with these means.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And if it is not dislodged, then administer its extraction with the tool called "subtle ear scoop," of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	 And if it is forgotten with a gesture, good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with one-eighth of an ounce of subtle doubling.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	 And if it is not forgotten in that way, then make a tube of iron and insert the tip of the tube into the opening of the ear canal and close around the tube with wax and softened oil so that it is not open except for the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	 Then extract it with your own strength using strong suction, as we have seen many times before in this matter.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	 But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take a little alum from alkali or old vinegar with which birds are caught, and place a small amount of it on the tip of the reed, and then wrap it decently around that cotton.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	 Then insert that into the ear canal gently, and then dry the ear of moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	 And therefore if it is not forgotten with all the causes that we have mentioned, then you should cut it before it becomes a pustule or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	 And the way to cut it is that you should first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein and draw blood according to their constitution, then make an incision between your fingers and turn the ear back into its original position, and then make a small opening in the edge of the ear near the place where it is most swollen.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 Sure, let's translate this sentence step-by-step into English:
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	 And if the cause of the pain is in the ear and it's due to one of the fats that grows and swells, then administer the treatment and extraction; but if it doesn't obey you upon examination, then take a delicate spatula according to this form.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	 And with that, administer the incision of that fat which is lodged in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	 And do not perform this when you think that it has already been softened by the heat of the ear, and place that in a small bag, and then extract from it with tweezers or a delicate hook, or with an incision as we have said, because the extraction is made easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	 But if water has entered the ear, it is necessary that the patient use sneezing at the beginning, and fill his ear with some old cloth, and pour over that ear in which the water is, and if by this it is expelled, good; and if not, then take three stones according to the length of the finger, and heat them a little in the fire, and let the patient insert one of those into the opening of his ear and jump on one foot of that side and strike with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	 Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	 And now you should have water drawn in such a way that you take some paper or cloth, and put one end of it into the ear and stretch the other end with fire until it is burned to the core.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	 Then put in another cloth and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is drawn out, and squeeze it with a probe just as mentioned above for the extracting stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	 But in the extraction of a living creature that enters into that ear, if it is a small thing similar to a flea, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large thing which causes pain in the depths of the ear, then administer its extraction with tweezers and scissors, and its cause is lighter than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	 However, in the extraction of a worm born in the ear, when you treat it with water as mentioned in the division and in the treatise on distillations and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary that you observe the ear in the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Therefore, if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract it with tweezers or fine scissors; but if no cause appears, then take a probe that is narrow at the tip and wider above, such is its shape.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	 And insert the slender tip into the ear according to the amount that the patient can withstand; and then suck out strongly with it, and do this many times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	 But if the patient does not cooperate with you in this treatment, then you should fill and seal the circumference of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distilled remedies that the ancients have already proven effective for treating worms, and you will find these in the treatise on distillations. ﻿
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And let your pouring instrument be that with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this tool, which has the following form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	 And make it of silver or iron, quite narrow, with a small hole in it, and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	 And thus it should be designed so that it fits snugly in the concavity of the tube containing the oils when necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	 And if you wish, take a reed and wrap its end neatly with cotton, then pour oil or the juice of some herb, or any of these medicinal liquids into the concavity of the tool — which is in the ear —, then insert the reed with the cotton into it, and press gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the tool and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	 And what has been inserted into the ear should already be lightly scraped with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	 And ensure that the remedy you distill into the ear is not too cold, because ear remedies do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	 Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	 On the treatment of ear wax buildup.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	 Sometimes, infants are born with unruptured membranes in their ears, and this can also happen to some men. This condition is caused by a blockage or growth within the ear canal; sometimes this blockage is located at the entrance of the ear canal, which cannot be seen, and other times it is located in the outer parts of the ear.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	 And that which occurs at the entrance, where one cannot see it, is in the most difficult conditions to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	 And in that which can be seen, it is necessary for you to place the ear of the patient towards the sun and look into it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And then if you see an apparent blockage, open it with a fine spatula like this one:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	 The tip of which should be narrow in width, one side being sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be two finger lengths long to avoid harming the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	 And so if the swelling is due to flesh born in the ear or in its meat, then take that with subtle scissors and incise it with great ease until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	 And if the swelling is in the bone of the ear, then take a subtle knife and warm it slightly with fire, and then place that in the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	 And so if you feel a swelling with water that the patient finds easily due to its heaviness, force the pressure of it easily; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then place in the ear linen according to the width of the hole which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound, or take some plant and soak it in vinegar and sprinkle it on three times a day, and use it; and if you see that the ear is already abscessed, then you must remove the plant and replace it with another plant which you will wrap in a plaster made from rose oil until the abscess has been cauterized; and then treat it until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	 If bleeding occurs, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the wound to slow the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	 Capitulo VIII (Chapter VIII)
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	 About the care of styes that appear on the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	 Styes that sometimes appear on the eyelids are moist at times and dry at other times.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	 Therefore, you should have those with tweezers or a needle, and carefully incise them with the tip of the tweezers or needle, and then place a poultice on the spots to dry them out.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	 But if there is pain with blood flow, then you should cauterize them with a fine-tipped needle or cautery instrument.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	 And the best way to cauterize is right after the incisions, and they often return if any of their roots remain; but when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	 Chapter IX
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	 Treatment for growths on the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	 Often in the eyelids of the eyes, some cause appears which is similar to a growth in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called a growth.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	 "And it is an accumulation of thick fluid in the eyelids below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	 "Therefore, the operation on them is that you should consider if the swelling in them is due to what comes out of the eyelids and is increasing everywhere; and the cause of this is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	 "Therefore, make an incision along its length, and then remove it from all parts with ease until it empties out, and then suspend it with hooks and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 "But if you are not skilled at making the incision, then penetrate the eyelid with an incision little by little, so that it does not cause any harm.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 "And if the swelling is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and care for it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	 "And if it is small, you will not encounter any harm from it, because the salve of it will restore and heal it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	 "And if the swelling is declining into the inner parts of the eyelid, you must take the inside surface. Then empty the eyelid and suspend the swelling with hooks, or whatever you need for the incision, and press it from all sides. And if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, this will not cause any harm.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	 And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and clean the area with water that contains flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	 Chapter 10
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	 About the care of the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	 A chalazion is a type of growth that forms in the tissues of the upper eyelid, and it mainly affects children. It worsens their vision and causes them to blink excessively; they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears flow into their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	 And for this reason you see these children squinting all the time, and when they sleep their eyelids are wet with tears, which have already covered the inflammation, and an impending appearance of a pustule is seen in the eye; and when you press on that area with your fingers, you feel a pustule inside it.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	 And there is another way of operation, in which the patient places their head on your seat, and then you place a cloth over them and make a circle around it according to the quantity that contains all the pus from all sides, and then you place that circle over the eyelid and press with your fingers all around so that the pustule is concentrated in the middle of the circle. And then make an incision in the middle of that wet area with a scalpel along its length, and the incision should not be larger than the one made in bloodletting.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	 "But in the patient, it is necessary that you cut the tendon completely until you reach the ankle, because in the most severe cases, pus drains through a rupture according to the form of white leprosy.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	 "Therefore, extract it with cloths that you have wrapped between your fingers, and turn between the right hand and the left until it is drained.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	 "And be careful not to insert anything into the rupture, so that with the spatula you do not reach the bone and displace it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	 "But if the ankle does not appear at the beginning of the rupture, then insert a small tube into the rupture to facilitate its appearance; and then extract it as we have said; and then soak cloths in water and vinegar and place them over the area and press firmly with bandages.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	 "And also apply salt compresses and place them in the cavity of the rupture, so that this residual moisture is absorbed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "And then continue to care for it until it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	 "But if an abscess forms in that place, then treat it with soothing poultices until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter 11
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	 Of ways of touching or feeling the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	 When pustules are formed under the natural eyelashes and become old, they often adhere to the eye and cause various ailments such as constant tears, softening of the eyelids, and a veil that can lead to eye damage, known as touching or feeling the eye. The cure is done in four ways: either with cautery using fire; or with a sharp medicine, as described earlier in the chapter on cautery; or by touching through incision and suture; or with needles, as I will describe.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	 Therefore, you should place the patient's head in your lap. Next, turn up the eyelid of the eye with your left hand. If it is raised, that's good; if not, insert a needle into the pustule under the eyelid and make the needle penetrate through the fiel above. Do this near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are born, near the hairs, and pull the thread towards the outside with the eyelid, and turn that [the eyelid] with the rayon.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	 And then incise in the inner part of the eyelid below the lashes with the spatula of the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller lacrimal duct; and then extract the pus and place small cotton or cloth pellets under the eyelid, and then seal over the eyelid with a bandage, and let it be like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	 But however, it is necessary that the shape be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, because this varies among people. There are some who need a large quantity to be incised from the eyelid, according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	 And then incise with the spatula along both lines that you have marked, beginning from the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	 And if your incision is close to the natural hairs as in the thickness of a reed.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	 And then place the knife in one of the two corners of the codena, and then excoriate that entire area, and then join with stitches both lips with fine wool yarn or thread, and cleanse the blood, and make adhere what exceeds of the threads onto two eyebrows with some adhesive substances, if you wish to do so, otherwise do not worry about it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	 And soon release the stitching of the thread within three or four days, and then treat it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	 And if you prefer, leave the wound without stitching and treat it with a substance that dries and tightens, because the eyelid is lifted due to the healing of the wound and its growth; but stitching is better. And thus said the ancient doctors about healing.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	 But nevertheless, be careful with the patient, and it is a good procedure if there is no fear in doing so.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	 And there is another way of treating it, which is to place over the eyelid a figure like a myrtle leaf, and then lift the eyelid with three stitches that are separate and joined in this manner:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 But if this is not possible, hold the stitches, and this is not successful, then take a needle with thread on it and insert that in the middle of the figure, and pass the other thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust between these threads with equality. Then with these elevate your hand with an equal lift, raise all the skin over which the figure is placed just as we have mentioned.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure it from within so that it may heal.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	 But if an abscess occurs, you must open or incise it, and close that abscess with wax and something similar to it, and with ointments.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	 And sometimes it is necessary for the eyelid that its hairs be turned, then you should use on it what we said about incision; but a stitch in each one is more skillful.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	 To straighten with reeds is done in this way:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	 And it is that you turn the eyelid and cut the shape that is inside, as I have described; and then by art make two reeds or two thin splints whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and their width is less than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	 And you have already cut at the ends of each partition where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	 Then add each one with delicacy on top of the excess from the eyelid, and tighten the reeds of each partition with great force, and leave it for several days, because the cord due to the tightness will die and will be rejected and will fall off until by itself it falls.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	 If it is too late, then break the spell with incantations, and immediately cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	 Therefore, once it has hardened, the eyelid is lifted, and the hairs do not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	 And this is the way to make two reeds according to this method:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	 and there shall be the quantity of length and width, neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter .12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	 Concerning the raising of stinging hairs on the eyelid with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	 When the hairs are unnatural, hard, rough and stinging in the eyelids, then the operation is to take a fine needle and place it on that thread of fine silk or flax, and carefully adjust its ends so that each one is very thin.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	 And let the length of the threads be about the size of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	 Then you compose another fine thread underneath it in a short time, and knot the ends of that one if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	 Then place the patient's head on your lap, and let it be towards the sun so that your work may be seen clearly, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	 And then promptly insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires it, and make it penetrate quickly through the eyelid until you extract it above the natural line of the hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	 And then pull the hair inside out and insert it into the alixati (a type of needle or probe), and let there be one, two, or three hairs, but not more than that.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	 And then withdraw your hand with it until the hair is drawn out through the eyelid along with the alixolati (needle) in its natural line.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	 But if the alixolati is pulled out and the hair is not drawn out, you will pull the alixolati back towards yourself with the thread that you have prepared with it, until the alixolati comes out from the upper hole.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	 And check it with the vision of the eye, for when you pull out the alixolati and the thread, and close each (eye) and seal them shut, leave the seals on for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and good flesh grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	 And if the hair is too short, then you take a long hair from the natural ones, and raise it with that (short hair), or let it be until it has lengthened a little more, and then you raise it.
Capitol .xiii.	 **Chapter XIII.**
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	 Of the treatment of chalazion, which appears on the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	 When it appears in the eye as chalazion and is a contraction of the eyelid, either on one side or the other, due to poor healing from an injury or cut or burn, and it is called leporina, this chalazion or leporina can be natural or accidental, caused by poor healing from injuries or cuts or burns, or resembling a similar condition in others.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 The method of the operation on it is to cut through that hardened area and separate its lips, and place between them a piece of linen cloth, and tie them together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	 And it is not necessary to use treatment on it from drying or constricting causes, because if you do this, the chalazion returns worse than ever before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	 Use treatments that soften, such as fenugreek, and soak it in water with althea and flax seeds, or an ointment of diachylon, which should be melted with some of the oils, and soak the cloth in this, and treat it with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	 And the treasure of your care is that you pierce with all skill that which is not solid according to the form that was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	 And this operation which we have mentioned is none other than a correction of the ehalixacrati, which restores the form of the place as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	 Chapter XIV
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	 About the care of ehacrati, which is done in the lower eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	 This ehacrati which is done in the lower eyelid, which is truly called ehacrati, is either of a certain nature or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	 But accidental ehacrati is caused by injury, wound, cautery, or similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	 And the way to perform this operation is as follows: Take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, then make the thread pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	 Then gently stretch the skin apart with the needle and sew it together, using a broad spatula to spread the area.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	 And thus, if the shape of the eyelid returns to its proper form, good; but if not, take the ray and place it on the cleft figure, and with that turn the eyelid, making two slits in the side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	 Here is the translation for "E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa." into English:
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	 And then remove that flesh by the amount equal to the length of the sharp object below it, which is the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	 And then adjust the separated parts and suture them with wool thread; and then treat them with the softening medications and compresses we have mentioned until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	 And if the eyelid needs to be opened by an incision or suture or cautery, then you should make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	 And then separate between the two lips with the compress as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	 In summary of the treatment for eyelid issues when they are above or below, let the operation proceed on it according to how it has been prepared in the form of the eyelid, and that is in the form of various small changes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	 And skilled craftsmen always prepare ingenuity in every possible way for him until he restores the figure to its natural form, or as close as possible to it, and that patient according to what is suitable for him regarding the operation and the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter 15
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	 Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	 When this hardening occurs in many men so that the eyelid is solidified and blocked from easy movement and its natural functions, then you should insert the end of a ray beneath the eyelid, raise it with that, or extend it with wax.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	 Then you should cut the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which should not be sharp but rather blunt at the tip so as not to disturb the patient during the operation, and leave the spatula in place so that it does not scratch the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	 And let your incision continue to gently separate that adhesion until the eyelid is returned to its natural shape and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	 And then you should put salt water in the eye with which you will wash it; or drip in it a solution of hyacinth dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	 And then separate the eyelid from the eye with oil of lilies, and place wool soaked in egg white on the eye, and on the third day use healing compresses until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter XVI
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	 Of the incision of the nail and of the flesh of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	 "Know that a nail is of two kinds, either it is nervous and resembles thin, hard ice, or it is non-nervous and resembles white, congealed humidity. When this touches iron, it is necessary to take hold of the nail with tongs, cut it, and not put the tongs in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	 "And both species originate from the large tear duct, which gradually covers the vision and prohibits light and eye movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	 "However, the manner of operating in the incision is that the patient places their head on your knee, then opens their eyes, and with your hand lifts the eyelid. Then collect the nail with tongs of slight doubling and extend it to the outer parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	 "And then take a needle and insert a horsehair or ox hair, or something similar, or strong thread, or double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail. Penetrate with the needle and tie the nail with thread; extend it to the outer parts, and peel off the skin of the nail with the hair, which is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	 And thus you follow him with your hand through his behind.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	 And then you incise the remaining part of the tear duct into its natural path with a fine spatula or small scissors, and clean the skin of the natural tear duct to prevent continuous tearing after the operation.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And sometimes the nail with the sole of the finger extended or with thread, as we said, and then it should be carefully cleaned with a thin spatula like this one.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	 And be careful not to touch the corneal tissue with the spatula and cause a tear, or puncture the pupil.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 Then place a little of crushed salt or sieved ashes in the eye after the incision, and leave it there until the next day; then wash it with appropriate water until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	 And if the nail is not infected and you cannot insert the needle, or it is not firmly attached to the finger, then this type of nail can be treated with medicines and will heal as I have described in the section on treating them.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	 And if you want to incise it, then open the eye of the patient and take a thin spatula of appropriate sharpness like this:
am subtilitat.	 This phrase appears to be incomplete or out of context without further information. However, based on the pattern observed in the previous translations, "am" could be interpreted as a variant spelling of "a," which means "to." "Subtilitat" seems similar to words related to subtlety or finesse in romance languages.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	 Based on the pattern and similarity to Latin and Romance languages, here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	 And then continue the operation on that until everything is removed from him, except for the contrary abscess which is in the eye, because if you leave that, and first cure the beginning of the abscess until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	 And then continue your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	 The prominence of the tear-producing gland, if it is noticed in the eye due to great damage, should be suspended with a hook; and you should make an incision on that part, but do not complete the incision so that tears do not flow out.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	 And then apply a poultice of rose and fennel to the tear duct until it heals.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter XVII.  This indicates that the text is divided into sections or chapters, with this being the seventeenth chapter.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	 Of the incision of the tear duct and of what is born from the joined flesh in the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	 Sometimes in the eyes of some people, red flesh is born, and it grows until it covers the pupil, or it approaches or presses on the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the outer parts, resembling a row of balusters.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	 But the operation on it is that the patient places his head on your knees; and then open the eyelids of that one and collect all that flesh with suitable hooks for this purpose, and take that with forceps or tweezers; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the scissors, and be careful not to damage the eye during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	 Based on the context and similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's my line-by-line translation of the given text:
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	 And if there remains any cause of inflammation and the wound is cauterized with boiling blood, and you fear an abscess, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with something that draws out the abscess. Then proceed to operate on it until it is healed. Similarly, do this for the flesh that is affected in the same way around this area.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	 But you must ensure that all care of the open wound is done either naturally or through an accidental means, using iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can tolerate that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	 Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	 On the Collection of Pus from the Wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	 The pus is like dark veins that are clotted over the wound and prevent the treatment from working, and they can keep the wound open for many days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	 Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and in it there is no other illness besides pus, then you should collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	 And you should command the patient to place his head on your lap, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your judgment; and let that ounce be of double thickness according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	 It seems that you've provided an incomplete sentence for translation. Could you please provide the full sentence or more context so I can give you an accurate English translation?
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	 Certainly! Here’s the translation of the provided sentence:
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	 Certainly! Let's translate the given text line by line:
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	 And when you have completed [the task], then you distill in the head chiefly vinegar or rosemary, so that with its sharpness it can corrode what has been removed from the liver.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	 But if it is not possible for you to gather everything at that moment, then you should apply a plaster with what alleviates the pain of the patient and leave them alone for some days until the pain subsides and the abscess heals carefully.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	 And then you should repeat the process on the patient following the same manner until they are cured.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	 And this is the shape of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter XIX
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	 On reducing prolapsed nose cartilage.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	 When you are treating a prolapsed nose with cautery or sharp medicine according to what has been previously described and it does not heal, do not cut into it but make incisions over the abscess until it matures, and extract all the moisture that is in it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And once the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness on it, then scrape it with an instrument of this shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	 And it is named "rasp" with a sharp tip, made of iron, and the tip should be round like a file or rasping tool with fine punctures (as shown in the following figure).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	 And place that over the decayed part of the bone, then rotate it gently between your fingers, and press your hand gradually until you feel that the corruption has been removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	 And this should be done several times, then restore the area with drying and astringent substances.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	 Therefore, if the area has healed and healthy flesh has formed, and the body is free from corruption and remains so for forty days without recurrence or swelling or any mishap, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	 And if not, then it is not wise to do anything other than reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and do so in this manner: first you should expose the bone using either an iron [tool] or sharp medicine, and when the bone has been exposed, then take a file of this shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	 Its end should be triangular, and its handle should first be narrowed towards the tip like this.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	 Then place it on the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal bone; and extend your hand a little towards the nostril, and then turn your hand with the file until it penetrates all of the bone, and this will cause the patient to feel relief as air begins to escape from their nose.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	 Therefore, at this point, restore the area with astringent medicines and dry it out as well.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	 Therefore, when the flesh and the area have hardened, at that point the material which was flowing to the external parts returns to the nose, thus it is easier on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	 Chapter 20
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	 On the reduction of the prominence of the nose.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	 When the nose protrudes in its entirety and no harm or diminishment occurs in the vision, then you should let the patient rest, and follow them, and place ventouses on the neck without scarification and with good suction; and then apply a liniment on the nose that is made of alkanet, aloe, henna, and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the poultice on the nose with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	 And the manner of the powders is that you take many cloths of linen, and each cloth be folded in four layers; and make many of these.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	 Then place those one on top of the other according to the amount that the nose needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	 Then strengthen on top of those with a hard cloth with strong pressure; and repeat the ventouses with suction without scarification; and then remove the ventoses and let the nose remain narrow day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	 But if during that time the ligament has softened, then it is necessary for it to be very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	 And then remove the bandage both day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	 And if you see that the wound has already been reduced, that is good; but if not, then repeat the application of the plaster with powders and tightness and the cupping until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	 On the incision of the thin membrane of the uvea.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	 When there is an outward projection of the uveal membrane through the eyelids like a grain of sand, and this disfigurement causes concern, if you want to incise it, then perform the operation in this manner: insert one needle into the uvea from below towards above, and introduce another needle at the lacrimal duct which should be double the length of the first needle. Make the second needle penetrate and leave the first needle in place according to its position; then incise the place where the two needles meet and lift the part of the uvea around the needles, and strengthen it greatly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	 Sure, let's break down this medieval text and translate it into English step by step:
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 And then treat the eye with water that soothes it until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	 And sometimes add to the entire area around the eye with a circular piece of cloth, making it protrude prominently. Then, puncture it subtly with a spatula that reaches the bottom of the eye, allowing the humidity to drain from the albuginea, and then lower the eyelid and insert it immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	 And then strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22
De curacio de alconati.	 Of the care of alconati (a Latinized form of "alcanata," an ointment or unguent).
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	 This illness, which is called alconati, is nothing but an ointment that resembles descending water and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	 However, the way to treat it is to make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take their head in your hands from both sides, and moisten that area where you see the ointment reaching the lower parts, so that it dries up and does not descend, and the light is obstructed, and the patient sees the causes as they are seen.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	 And if it does not descend downwards, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	 When it is forgotten, then you distill in the nose hot water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 And [the patient] should be treated with other remedies until they are healed.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	 About the treatment of water coming from the nose.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	 We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which ones are suitable for perforation with an instrument, according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	 Then it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie his nose tightly with a thread.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	 Then place your left hand near the eyelid of his nose, if the nose with water is the left one; or with your right hand, if it is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	 And then with your right hand take a cotton swab, if the nose is the left one; or with your left hand, if it is the right one.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	 Then place the tip of the cotton swab near the rim by the thickness of a grain in the corner of the nose on the side of the smaller tear duct, and then remove the cotton swab with skill and roll your hand with it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	 And then penetrate into the abdomen through the navel, and you will feel that the liver has already been reached due to its size.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	 And ensure that the distance from the liver to the spleen is equal to the length of the space between the pupil and the edge of the black area, which is the navel; for you will see with this pupil through the clarity of the corneal membrane.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	 Then press the liver into the place where the water is located, and then draw it down once more, and if the water descends quickly, then see the patient on what side his eyesight returns first, and the liver in its own navel.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	 Then wait a little while; if the water has descended, then you should pause that other time before the liver is displaced.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	 And when it is dry and does not descend, then you should extract the liver easily, and roll it a little at a time with your hand, and then dissolve a little salt in water and wash the navel inside; and then place outside the navel a bandage or a sponge soaked in rose oil and egg white, and lick the navel with water.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	 "But we and those of our time apply a compress of egg whites to it.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "But if your servant does not obey the command to drink water due to its bitterness—for it is bitter for some people—then you should take the ointment called 'alberid,' of which this is the recipe:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	 "And therefore, puncture that joint with it, and do not extend your hand into the wound, but only make a subtle opening for the command.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	 "And then insert the command as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	 "And you must prepare the patient's sleeping chamber in a quiet and dark manner, upon which they will sleep on their back, and all movements are forbidden.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	 "And place on the patient's body something that will balance their nature, and do not turn their head to either side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	 "And let the treatment be continued according to its effect for up to three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	 "Then undo it in that dark room and ask for his opinion, and have him see some things, and then resume the treatment on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	 "And this should not be done during the hour of the moon or shortly before the full moon.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	 Based on the provided pattern and context, here's a possible translation of the given sentence:
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	 If an abscess bursts, it is necessary to release the pus before seven days and treat it with water that promotes the draining of the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	 Then you should cover the patient's eyes and place a cloth over their face to help regulate their vision for some days, as long as they are in the darkest room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	 Then gradually remove them from that darkened room and let them return to their usual activities.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	 And know that a student of surgery is not exempt from vision sometimes, and then you must be skillful in performing the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	 And now it has come to our attention that some of those who practice the art, and one of them said that he made fire in the air using a magnet with which he drew water. ︎ E aprop tengua caut en tas manos de fer am punta de alchataa , e apoz pone la punta en le loc del foc, e aprop tira denan lo igni, e aprop reposa sobre el loc on es feyt.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	 But I have not seen anyone in our land who has accomplished this, nor is it written about in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	 And these are the shapes of magnets, which should be known by those who do not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	 And they should be made of iron or steel, and their tips should have this subtlety: they should be triangular in shape, with the pointed end being the primary form.
Capitol .xxiv.	 Capítulo 24. (Capítulo means chapter)
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	 About the treatment of flesh torn in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	 When in the nose there are born diverse fleshy growths from which comes an irritant like the sting of a scorpion or a polyps, and this illness is called polyps because it resembles that fish.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	 And if the flesh is cancerous, yellowish, of dark color; and if it is a red color (leon means lion or reddish), then it is not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	 Therefore, in those that are in these reddish fleshy growths, if they are not ulcerous or cancerous, it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands and place him in the sun, and open his nostrils, and prick your thumb in those fleshes.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	 Then immediately draw it out to the parts outside, and then cut what you have contained with that sharp subtle spatula from one part until you know all the flesh is drawn; if anything remains from which the separation is possible, then scrape it with one of the thin instruments with ease until nothing remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	 Based on the pattern of the given translation and the similarity to medieval Latin-based languages, here's a line-by-line translation attempt:
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	 And then pour into the nose near the opening vinegar and water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	 But if the nose is open and from it moisture enters the palate, then know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	 But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you should know that within him flesh is necrotizing on the upper bones of the nose, which have not been reached by the opening.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	 Therefore, at that time it is necessary to introduce fat into him, which has some thickness, and put the fat in pieces, and place between each piece the amount of the said finger or hand, and lift up the patient and insert one end of the fat into the nose with a ray or with another instrument that is possible for him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	 And after doing this, let him blow his nose until it reaches the passages of the nostrils, and let it come out on its own, for many times something similar to this action is done by children in school, and it is a light cause for those who want to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	 Then place the two ends of the fat, one end that comes out of the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a flesh stitch with the pieces that are in the fat, and do this until you know that the flesh is already with the pieces of the fat.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	 And then extract the bile, and place in the nose near the blood vessel a reed, and do this for three days or more until the ointment dissolves all that is soft of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	 And then at the end of the procedure, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	 But if you decide to use drying treatment, use this one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	 And this is the design of the instrument for capipurge, with which oils and medicines are instilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	 And make it of silver or iron, which should be similar to a small open bowl, like a little cup, and the opening similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	 And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the nozzle of the capipurge instrument should be flat and open; at its end there should be a handle, with which you hold it when pouring in oil or water that you want from the juices and absorbent substances.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	 And these capipurges are precious: take castor bean, white hellebore, ginger, saffron, long pepper, scabious, and ephedra - six in number. Mix with the juice of wheat and cabbage, and make them into pills. Then temper one pill with warm water and pour it into the nose of the patient lying down.
Capitol .xxv.	 "Capitol .xxv." appears to be a chapter or section heading in Roman numerals. It translates to "Chapter 25" or "Section 25".
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	 "De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas." translates to:
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	 It seems like you're working with a text in Occitan, a Romance language closely related to French and Catalan. Here's my line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	 And for that reason, you should insert it at the beginning of the patient's appearance, and record everything.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	 Then place either a cautery or a burning medicine on the spot where the affected area is located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	 But if the insertion is delayed until it becomes prominent, then consider whether it has hardened, become firm, turned dark, and is less sensitive. In that case, do not touch it with iron because it is a malignant abscess; for many times it happens that one who inserts this abscess will suffer great harm from the patient on whom it was inserted.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	 And if the abscess is soft to the touch and not dark in color, and it's possible to insert at any time, then evacuate the patient and insert it without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	 About the stitching of the nose, lips, and ear when their continuity has been disrupted by a wound or similar injury.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	 Know that when there is a loss of continuity in one of these parts, you will not perform this operation on most people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Therefore, when there is a reason to do so for any of these causes, consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then you should join the two lips of the wound with stitches, and then treat it until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	 And if the lips of the incision have already been separated and each one is made healthy, then you should cut each part of its cord until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	 And then sew the two lips together and strengthen them; sprinkle dragon's blood powder on them, and place on the powder a thin compress of emplastrum diaphragma, or some other consolidating plaster, and leave it for two days or three, then remove it and replace the plaster and leave it until the stitches dissolve by themselves, and then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	 However, the method of stitching is that you join the incision either with needles as we have described in the stitching of the belly, or join the incision with thread as you are aware.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	 On the removal of those causes that come in the two lips in the inner parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	 Many times it happens to many men in the inner parts of their lips certain hard swellings resembling goose fat, and some are smaller and others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	 Based on the given translation style and the context of a medieval medical treatise, here's my attempt at translating the sentence:
Capitol .xxviii.	 It seems like you are trying to translate or guess the meaning of medieval medical text written in an old language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The text starts with "Capitol .xxviii." which likely means "Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	 Of the incision of tight flesh on the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	 When you see tight flesh or swelling on the gum, which the ancients called albulus, then you should suspend it with a hook that you have with the scissors and incise it to its root, and let the pus or blood flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	 Then immediately place over the wound dry linen or other styptic or drying powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	 And if that flesh returns, then incise it again and cauterize it, for after the cautery it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	 Of the cause of a tooth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	 When on the surface of the separated teeth and front teeth, among the gums, there are rough, hard scabs, some of which are blackened and become yellow or green, until the gum becomes corrupt in this way, the teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	 Therefore, you should make the patient sit between your hands and place their head on your knees. Then clean the teeth on which those scabs appear with something like sand until nothing remains of them, so that the blackness, yellowness, and other [colors] are removed until they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	 Therefore, if what is in that area has been removed at the beginning of the treatment, it is good; and if not, then you repeat the treatment on those areas for another day, and on the second day, and on the third day, until it reaches the final stage in which you want it.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	 And know that teeth have need of many tools of diverse forms and shapes, depending on what your operation requires.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	 And because the tool with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the tool with which it is cut between the teeth according to other shapes, you should prepare these forms of tools, which you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	 Chapter .xxx
D’eradicacio de dentz.	 Of tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	 Be careful that you cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and delay in all extraction of it, for there is no reason that justifies the removal of it when it is extracted, because it is a sublime substance until it is an excuse in its extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	 However, when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be firmly certain which is the painful tooth, for many times the pain deceives the patient and he thinks it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and then the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, because we have already seen this happen due to the actions of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	 Here's the translation of your sentence:
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	 And then place in him strong tongs for good speech or powerful traction, and place the patient's head between your thighs so that you hold it well and it does not move, and then draw out the tooth straightaway without breaking it, lest you cause the patient greater pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	 And so if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it under the patient in such a way that it is easily removed from them, just as was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	 But if the tooth is crooked or decayed, then it is necessary that you fill that cavity with cloth and strengthen it with a thin ribbon so that it is not fractured during your constriction upon it with tongs.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	 And it is necessary that you work carefully with scarification all around the gingiva and be careful not to break or leave a part of it behind, and return to the patient lest they suffer more than their initial pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	 And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their arrogance and lack of care in extracting teeth, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they cause great pain in the afflicted, which is more difficult to treat, and all or some of those reasons are due to the fact that you may extract it with pieces of bone from the jaw, as many times we have witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	 And immediately after the extraction of it (the tooth), his mouth should be washed with wine or vinegar mixed with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	 And if there is bleeding through this [process], as in many cases may occur, then take some amount of sage and sprinkle it over the wound. If that does not help, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	 The shape of the forceps and tongs with which the tooth is initially seized should be long-tipped, with a short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when working with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	 And thus the handles should be thick enough that they are not bent when using them, but the tips should be short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	 And they (the forceps and tongs) should be made of Indian iron, with straight tips. At the ends of these, there should be teeth that fit into each other tightly, and sometimes the tips of these should be in the shape of a stork's beak, which is blunt, and they are very constrictive.
Capitol .xxxi.	 Chapter 31
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	 On the extraction of teeth and the removal of bones from locked jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	 When you need to remove a broken tooth, there is some cause that prevents it. In this case, you should place a cotton pad with border over the area for one or two days until the area becomes softened; and then insert tweezers or pliers, the extremities of which resemble the beak of a bird called a stork or a glove, in the shape of forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	 The extremities of them should be made thin like a file or a chisel.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	 And if the tooth does not yield to extraction with these forceps or pliers, then you should cut through the gum and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called "atali," which is a small lever whose shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 And let it have a short handle, a little thick, and not be blunt so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	 Therefore, if in this way the gum is perforated, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments whose forms are as follows: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	 The form of the second instrument is that it should have a triangular and more subtle extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	 And you have already been assisted with this instrument, which has two parts, and this is its shape.
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	 And with other instruments which I will describe later for tooth scraping; because it is also done with this instrument which resembles a large thimble, and this is its shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	 Its triangular tip should be twisted or shortened to some degree of thickness and not be blunt, so that it does not become dulled.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	 And know that the tools for removing teeth are similar and likewise with other tools.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	 But the skilled and subtle artisan in this craft finds for himself, according to what the operation and various illnesses require; because there are illnesses that the ancients did not mention or assign a specific tool, due to the different shapes of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	 But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is splintered or broken, then it should be carefully cut on that spot with the appropriate instrument and forceps which we mentioned for the extraction of tooth roots. Assist yourself with this tool whose shape is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	 And it should be slightly thickened gradually, and it should be inserted or held in the mouth so that it does not leak or escape until the bone is completely removed; and then restore the area with appropriate medicine.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Capitol .xxxii.	 **Translation:** Chapter .32
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	 **Translation:** About the care of protruding teeth over others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	 **Translation:** When teeth are protruding and do not follow their natural shape, it is unfortunate, especially in women, and even more so in elderly venerable ones; therefore, you should consider: if the tooth is close to another tooth, and removal or straightening is not possible, then extract that tooth. But if it is attached to another tooth, then you should cut it with this instrument which has the following form; and it is like a pig's snout, and it should be made of Indian steel with a very sharp point.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	 **Translation:** And let your cut be with the instrument that you would use to cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that another tooth is not damaged.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	 **Translation:** And if it is an exposed protruding tooth, then file that with a file of Indian iron like this one:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	 **Translation:** And let all of it be made of Indian iron, and the edge should be sharp; and let it have many small points like a file with which needles are made. With this, the tooth should be filed little by little over several days gently, so that no other tooth is damaged or decayed.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	 And then clean it at the end, and shave it with sharp razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	 And if it is a tooth from which a piece has broken off and it touches the tongue, then you should scrape that part inside so that the roughness of that fragment is removed and smoothed, and it is filled so that the tongue does not get cut and the speech is not corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter .33
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	 On restoring bad teeth with gold or silver fillings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	 When an accident occurs to the front teeth by way of concussion or displacement through blows or falls, and the patient cannot chew anything, and you have treated it with astringent medicines, and your treatment has not been effective, then because it is not proper for them to be strengthened with silver fillings (since silver turns black and quickly loses its luster after several days), but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	 And let the filling be in such fineness and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; and the method of preparation is that you take the filling and take twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and then increase with two twists of the wire between two damaged teeth, or if one or more, until it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	 And then you should gently and skillfully insert your hand into the incision where you started, ensuring that it is not too forceful.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	 And with the thread by which you strengthen the ligaments, you must tie the roots of the teeth so that they do not decay.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	 And then you should cut the extra ends of the thread with forceps or scissors, and insert those into each location carefully, and turn them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that they do not harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	 And then leave it thus tightened as Rome does.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	 However, if it becomes loose or broken, strengthen that or those with another thread in the same manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	 And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth and two decayed teeth, as you see these tied together.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	 And when it is done that the tooth or teeth return to their place, then close each one in its location, and they should grow again as we have described, and they will heal.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	 And only do this if you are a skilled craftsman and wise.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	 And sometimes it is suitable to use a cow bone for this purpose, and one is made from it in the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth has fallen out, and it is strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves with that for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	 Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	 Of the swelling that occurs on the tongue and impedes speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	 This swelling that occurs below the tongue sometimes is natural with which one is born, or it can be accidental and happens due to a blow that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	 The procedure is to open the mouth of the patient, with their head tilted back; and lift up their tongue, and then carefully cut that nervous swelling according to its size until the tongue is released from its constriction.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	 But if there is any hardness or knot in it, and this is due to the consolidation of a blow, then you should pour oil and cut through it until you have cut the swelling and the knot has been resolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	 And be careful that there is not a fracture in the flesh, and that you do not cut too deeply so that blood flows out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	 Then wash the traces of the incision with vinegar or warm water; and then place a cloth under the tongue, this is the method by which you keep the patient from speaking at night to prevent it from becoming consolidated again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	 If a bleeding occurs, place crushed vitriol on the area; but if the blood flows, then cauterize the area with an ancient cautery that is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	 Then treat with other remedies until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter .xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	 About removing a cyst from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	 Sometimes, a cyst similar to a small lump appears under the tongue, preventing it from functioning naturally; and if it grows too much, it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	 The procedure for this is to open the patient's mouth sitting in front of a light and examine the cyst.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	 And if you see it is dark or black in color, hard, and the patient feels no pain, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	 And if it tends toward whiteness, indicating moisture, then insert a knife into it and cut it open with a fine spatula, cutting through all parts; and if blood comes out during your operation, then place crushed zegi (a type of vitriol) on top until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 Then return to your task until you have completely removed it, washing the area with vinegar and salt; and treat it with other appropriate remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	 It seems you are asking for assistance with translating Medieval text from a language that is akin to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French into English. Here's how we can approach this task step-by-step. Please provide the Medieval text you wish to translate, and I will do my best to help you decipher it line by line.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	 Let's break down the text into manageable parts and provide an English translation for each segment:
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	 When a boil appears on the throat, they are glands that resemble cotton, which happen outside and are called two ears. If you cure them with the water we mentioned in the section and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark in color, and has little feeling; do not touch that one with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	 And if it is red in color and the root is large, then do not touch that one with iron because of the flow of blood; rather, let it be until it matures, and then either you will pierce it, or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	 And if it is white in color, round, and its root is thin, then that is the one that needs to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And the operation on it is that you should consider before your operation whether the abscess has already been repressed by complete rest or if it has decreased with some decrease; and then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head should be in your left hand, and open his mouth, and a servant taking between his hands presses the tongue downwards with a very noble instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	 And let it be made of silver or iron, and let it be thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	 Therefore, when you press on the tongue with that [instrument] and the abscess is revealed to you, then place your instrument over it, take a lancet, insert it into the opening, and draw out the pus as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 Another thing that sometimes causes removal of the tunics, then incise it with an instrument of this shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	 and it is like a pair of forceps, but the tips are curved so that the opening of one is at the end of the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	 But if this instrument is not available to you, then incise it with a spatula of this shape: and let it be sharp on one side, but not sharp on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	 And after you have incised one hole, incise the other in the same manner of incision, and then the patient will heal from cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 But if there is bleeding, heal with water from the decoction of pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves, similar to those causes that are astringent, until the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	 This sentence is discussing some medical issues related to the ear. Let's break it down:
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	 And I had already treated a woman with an abscess that had formed in her throat, which abscess tended to be dark in color and caused little pain; it had already closed off her throat, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, and I had forbidden her from eating or drinking water, and she would have died within one day or two if left untreated.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	 And the abscess had grown so large that it produced two openings through which pus was discharged.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	 Therefore, I cut a fistula and inserted it into one of the openings, then pulled out a large portion of pus. Then I incised that opening to comprehend the other opening, and I closed the mouth with a bandage, compressing the tongue, and then I inserted the fistula into the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	 And then I incised a large portion of it, and from it flowed only a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	 Therefore, the throat of that woman was completely healed, and she began to drink water right away, and then started to eat food. Because I did not stop incising that abscess many times over a long period, new abscesses formed in its place, which were incised until they too were prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	 Based on the provided context and similarities to medieval medical texts, here's a line-by-line translation attempt:
Capitol .xxxvii.	 "Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	 "On the incision of the navel when it is swollen.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	 "When there is catarrh in the navel, and it is swollen and long, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is at the exit, thick and round, then it is called a boil.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	 "But when it is treated with the water we mentioned earlier, and your treatment does not work, and sometimes even if the abscess has already been removed and is subtle, then you should incise that which is added round; and if it is to that length, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and is not in good condition, then you should attempt to incise it, because in this there is danger for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	 "And when you see that according to the manner I have mentioned concerning its whiteness and length, make the patient sit up and press their tongue with an instrument of the appropriate shape, and then place the knife at the navel, pull it downwards, and incise it with one of the two instruments mentioned in the incision of the two lips.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	 "And it is necessary that you do not incise it unless it is adjusted to its natural limit without addition, because if you incise more than this, you will damage the patient's speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 And at the incision, use what we have recommended for the treatment of two mellas, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 If the patient is frightened by the incision, it is necessary to use cunning in his cauterization without fear. The method of cauterization for him is only with sharp water, and you should place the patient's head on your lap, then press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned, and then take the water we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and make a live coal with it, and apply it not too thick or too thin, and fill the cavity of the instrument whose shape is this:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	 Let the end of it be concave where the medicine is placed, like the cavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the lip [of the patient], and the patient should move his head so that saliva or mucus from his mouth flows into the intrinsic medicine, so that no drop falls onto his throat and that it descends.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	 Then take the medicine in your hand and squeeze it onto the uvula for about half an hour until you see it become blackened and subdued by the bitterness of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	 Sure, let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	 And this type of treatment is safer than incision and less dreadful.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	 Sometimes the uvula is treated with water that is more subtle than cautery or incision, because it is cured by sublimation in this manner: take calamentum, hyssop, origanum, rue, dried Arabic gum, chamomile, and other similar herbs, mix them all together, or some of them, with vinegar, let them boil; and the vessel should be well sealed with wax, and there should be a hole in the middle of the vessel, over which place an instrument shaped like this; it should be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	 And the end of the instrument should be inserted into the patient's mouth until the steam reaches the uvula, and it is greatly darkened.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	 And repeat this process several times until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the onset of an abscess, as it will increase the abscess, which should not happen unless the abscess has been lanced by a cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	 But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach a hen's egg to its end, so that the patient's mouth is covered, because the shell of the egg prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	 And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	 Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	 On the removal of thorns and water that adheres in the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	 Many times, things stick in the throat or a thorn from a fish or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	 Then it is necessary that you remove the water that appears from these things, which can be seen when you press the tongue with an instrument in front of it, so that what is in the throat will be revealed to you.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	 And what is hidden from you in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food has been digested in the stomach, because if the cause attached to the throat is expelled by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of napkin or a root of lettuce or a mouthful of dry bread; or takes a piece of dried sea sponge and binds it strongly with honey, and then the patient swallows that, because when it reaches the place where the thorns are, they are removed.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	 Or take an eel and bind it with honey, and place it inside the mouth, and by sucking it will be extracted; or take a leek and insert it into the mouth, and by sucking it out you will remove it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	 However, if you are not aware of those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	 And it should be thicker than a finger, and at its end there should be a concavity which you can easily insert into the throat.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	 And have the patient lift their head up, and be careful not to touch the bone of the throat, so that it does not hurt the body and so that the doctor with his hand can peel away the bone or the spine.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	 But however, that which the sick person introduces is better, because of his knowledge of the place of the attached cause, and he peels downwards and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the quantity that is prepared within until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	 Chapter XXXIX
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	 On the Extraction of a Leech Attached to the Throat
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	 When the leech is treated with the water that we mentioned in the division of care with medicines and not with cautery, consider then in the patient's throat, because you have pressed the tongue with the instrument that we told you about.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	 Therefore, if you see the leech, extract it gently with a small spoon or with fine tweezers.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	 And if it is not possible for you to extract the object with your hand, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat. Next, place an ignited iron in the concavity of the cannula and repeat this process until the leech dies and falls out of the throat. Afterward, ensure that the patient abstains from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	 And then take a bladder full of cold water and open the patient's mouth into it, washing the mouth with it; do not swallow any of it, but spit out the water one hour later with your hand, because the leech will die as soon as it feels the cold water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	 But if the leech is not expelled with the water that we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument that we have mentioned for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	 Do this until it falls out.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	 And there is another way of operating with this fumigation: that you take an earthenware vessel in which there are burning coals, and the vessel is covered with a lid, in the middle of which there is a hole; and the end of the instrument is placed in that hole; then apply the fumigation; and place the patient's mouth on the tip of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation is not wasted until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech, because the leech will immediately fall out.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	 And if not, then you must repeat the fumigation many times, and make the patient abstain from drinking, and have them eat salty foods and almonds, and do not let them drink water. It is necessary that this treatment be followed diligently.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	 And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodletting is performed on the gullet when it is visible; and it resembles forceps as you see, except that in it there is a certain curve.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	 which is placed on the gullet, and its extremity resembles the beak of a stork, which is wide, in which there are roughnesses made by a file, so that when we press any part, it does not slip away.
Capitol .xl.	 Chapter 40
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	 In which is the summary of the discussion on abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	 Abscesses are many types, of many kinds, as will be remembered for each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	 And they differ in their piercing and incision in two ways: the first is due to the type of abscess itself, and the second is because of what we learn from the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	 Sure, let's translate this line by line:
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	 And of some boils, there are those which should not be pierced until their proper ripening or healing.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	 And other boils which should be pierced when they are raw and not yet ripened according to their nature, such as those that form near joints. For a boil that is near a joint has its existence prolonged until it can spread to the surrounding area, and the ligaments or nerves of that joint are easily corrupted, which causes contraction of that member; or it is near a main member, and if you delay piercing it until it is ripe, it may cause putrefaction in the main member; or it is near the anus, so pierce it even if not yet ripened; but do not pierce it raw from incomplete digestion, except for those near the anus, to prevent its pus from spreading and extending into the inner parts of the anus, creating a fistula, or causing a condition that does not heal at the site.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	 But you should know the time for piercing a boil, and this is when it has ripened.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	 And know that it is ripened when there is the cessation of pain and fever, as well as the reduction of heat and pulse, and the sharpening of the boil's head, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	 And because it is necessary that you know how to make a puncture in the place most below the abscess, and from there comes the cure of the swelling.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	 And let the puncture always be made along the length of the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the places of the wrists, the cords of the nerves, the arteries; and finally, in all places similar to these where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	 But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave the puncture of it until its digestion is confirmed according to the rules we have mentioned; because if you puncture it before that, the body of the pus and much dirt will be prolonged, and the lips of it will become hardened and the depth will be increased.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	 But some abscesses must be punctured according to the thickness of the flesh or the body, as necessary, or according to what that member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	 And it is necessary to administer a small puncture, and in large abscesses a large and wide puncture or many incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	 And others are of the apostemas in which it is necessary that the head be concave and cut when it is made thus like bread and done in a time when it has already set, as with those that happen in cases of double vision and boils.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	 And of those that are cut with a section having three angles; and of these is one which is cut as the figure of a myrtle leaf, like the apostemas of the angles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	 And of these are those in which a round section and a crescent-shaped section are administered, similar to the previous ones.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	 But that one to which there is no head like these superficial apostemas, it is necessary that you pierce it with a superficial or flat perforation alone.  />
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	 And it is necessary that when the aposteme is large and has collected much pus, you pierce it and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at once; having extracted a part of it, and then close the apostema until the next day, and then extract a larger portion, and then do this many times according to the degree until it is completely removed.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	 Especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly person in decay, because the vital spirit many times is resolved with the exiting of the pus, and quickly and easily the patient dies, and you have opened them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	 This text appears to be discussing a medical procedure involving the treatment of boils or abscesses. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if in the abscess, a part of the cord or that has been concave around it is cut off, then you should fill it with clean cloth or linen thread, as when you have a wound or cut, without moisture; and strengthen that for three days; and then process and treat it with the appropriate ointments until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	 But if bleeding occurs during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar in which you have soaked a linen cloth, and place that over the site of the bleeding very often.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	 But if the bleeding persists, then you should administer treatment and care with powders that have been recommended in many places in this book of ours and in other works.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	 But if it is wintertime and the area of the abscess is a place with many nerves, then you should soak cotton in vinegar and warm oil and place them on the area.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 And if it is summer and the area is fleshy, then you should place cotton soaked in water and oil or vinegar and oil on it, and let everything be cold for three days, as we have said. Then you should open the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to its care what is appropriate for it until it heals.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	 And this is what is necessary for the understanding of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction, I have already said everything about each abscess and how it should be cured specifically by chapters.
Capitol .xli.	 Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	 About the incision of abscesses that occur in the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	 In the nape of the neck, small abscesses occur, and they are of various types of nodes that contain membranes in their composition; and the types are numerous.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	 And among them are glands, and there are those which contain a moisture resembling fat.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	 And there are those that contain a moisture resembling dust, and similar to them are the ones which are hard like stones.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	 And in the incision and extraction of all these, there is no fear, since the extraction of them does not cause discharge of blood.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	 And the operation in incision of these is that you should probe them with an instrument of this form, which is called a trepan, so that you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	 Because if what is inside is moisture, then cut it with an incision according to its length, with a superficial incision in this way:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	 And immediately submerge the area in Egyptian ointment if available, and if not, in water with salt; fill it with that and let it remain until the next day, because with water you can dissolve everything that is rough on that layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	 And immediately apply Egyptian ointment to that area gently and repeatedly as needed until you are sure there is no roughness on that layer; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	 And if the abscess contains fatty knots, then you should cut it in this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	 with an incision shaped like a cross, and cut between the two lips of the incision and scrape it from all sides, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	 But if your archery causes difficulty, then do what I have told you previously.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	 Similarly, perform the incision and treatment on a hardened abscess as we have told you; an incision on a hardened abscess is easier because it has little blood and moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	 And sometimes there are abscesses of this kind which are in the head of some men with whom there is no moisture; this happens because I once incised an abscess in the head of an old woman and found the abscess like dry, hard, white stone, which could not be pierced, and if someone were struck by it, they would suffer. ‌
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	 In the other types of boils that appear on the head, this chapter does not apply, such as the boils that come to the heads of children and are caused by the reasons of the ears, but the section of these should all be a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	 And place the perforation of those at their lowest part so that the body is relieved of pus in its lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	 Then cure them with water suitable for this type of treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	 Chapter 42
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	 On the incision of scrofula that occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	 Often these boils appear in the neck and armpits and groins; sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And those that occur in the neck, and many of which are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is within its own proper tunic, just as we have mentioned with the nodes and boils of the head.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	 And the types of these scrofula are many, for some of them are stony, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not obey treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	 Here's the translation of the given text:
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	 And it is of utmost importance that the vein or nerve not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	 And let the scalpel not be too sharp, so that it does not harm your hand with a cut, or disturb the patient, and cut only what is necessary to be cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and thus prohibit yourself from continuing your operation, then apply to the wound powdered vitriol or other powders which stop bleeding, tighten the wound, leave it alone until the sharpness of the abscess subsides, soften the wound, and allow it to begin to fester.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	 When the blood is released.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	 Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	 And then ask with your finger if there is any other cause of the other small pustules, so cut and clean those as well.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	 And if there is a large vein at the base of the pustule, it is best not to cut that pustule from its base.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	 Instead, it is better to bind it tightly with a strong cloth and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	 And then fill the wound with old cotton that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	 And if you cut away that entire scrofula, then it is necessary for you to join the two lips of the wound and suture it immediately so that no superfluous part remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	 But if you see that there is still some superfluous part due to the size of the scrofula, it is necessary for you to understand how to cut away the root of it, and then apply astringent and administer suture as mentioned.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And for those scrofulas that contain moisture, perforate them with a superficial puncture where you see the place of ripening, and make an opening so that the pus can come out from below, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	 And then administer the puncture with ointment and similar substances to those mentioned earlier, so that it dissolves what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	 And then when you see the wound is already cleansed, apply a generative flesh ointment to it until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	 Chapter XLIII
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	 About the incision of the pus sac that occurs in the throat.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	 The ancients said this incision should be made on the pus sac, and we have not seen anyone in our land who has done it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	 And this is the interpretation of their words.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	 But in men with gonorrhea, it is necessary to avoid the removal of the epileptus, because doing this does not help, as all the veins and major vessels of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	 But in those who have abscesses caught in the mouth or throat or two ears, when the disease is not in the vein, it is necessary to use the section of epileptus to prevent the loss which is done by piercing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	 Therefore, when we want to do this, we must cut the epileptus below three circles of the circles of the epileptus, or four with small section through the thickness in that which is between two circles for quantity. The section should be in cartilage, not in the flesh, and this place is suitable for cutting because it is lacking in flesh and its blood vessels are close together.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	 And if the physician is fearful, he should then extend the channel of the throat with an inch, and then split the channel until it reaches the vein. But he should avoid the blood vessels if any of them appear.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	 Then cut the lips according to what we have recommended; and it is indicated for the section of the vein by means of the fire which is of that exit, with that which is of it broken and by the suppuration of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	 "And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	 "So when the hour has passed in which the puncture is feared, add two lips of the scar to each other, and close it alone without the bandage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	 "And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	 "And Albucasis says that the sum of what we have discussed is that you should see that some of these boils already contain the poison of the patient, and the patient has come to the point of death, and his spirit is dry, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the wound for some breaths, and he may be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	 "And by this, he ordered to leave the wound open until the evil of the illness is consumed; and its evil lasts for three days; and then he ordered to close the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	 "And what I have seen myself is that a servant took a knife and stabbed herself in the throat, and with it cut off a part of the tube of the lung, and I was called to care for her, and found her breath like that of the dead, and discovered the wound and found the blood that came from the wound was little.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	 Sure, let's break down the given text and provide a translation:
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	 It seems like there's a mistake in the text you provided. The last sentence doesn't seem to fit with the context of the previous sentences, as it suddenly changes topic from medical treatment to a conversation with a servant. However, I can try to translate the sentence as it is:
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	 And now I say that in the cutting of the vein there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	 ### Chapter 44
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	 ### Concerning the Incision Over an Aposteme Which Occurs on the Groin Externally, and is Called a Hernia of the Groin
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	 ### This aposteme, named groin hernia, is a large abscess according to the body's constitution and is very common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	 ### It occurs in two ways, for it can be either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	 ### And the natural one is not easy to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	 ### And the accidental one occurs in two ways: one is similar to large knots, and the other way is similar to an abscess that is formed by the constriction of an artery, and therein lies the danger.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	 ### And it does not matter if one assumes it is iron, except in cases where it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	 ### And you should approach that and examine it with the said method, and if you find it similar to large knots, and it is not connected to any of the veins, then you should incise it just like knots, and extract it with water that contains laurel leaves and mallow; but if not, then its entire being must be investigated thoroughly, and subsequently cure the place with the necessary water until it heals.
Capitol .xlv.	 It looks like you're asking for help translating text from a medieval medical treatise. Given the nature of your request, I can provide guidance and translation assistance based on the context provided. However, I cannot generate specific translations without seeing the actual sentences you want to translate. If you provide more sentences or lines from the text, I'll be happy to assist you in translating them into English.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	 "De seccio de las especias de nodos.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	 "From the knots come various species, and I have already mentioned all of their species in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	 "And it is fitting that I also recount the difference between a knot and an exit wound, if there should be any doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	 "So I say that with an exit wound there is heat and fever and severe pain until the overflow of excess is settled; and when the decay is complete, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	 "But with a knot there is no heat, no fever, nor pain, and I tell you that such an injury is peculiar to the bowel.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	 "And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a boil, and it is made as such, whether large or small, and there are two species of them: either they are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 "Therefore, when you come to the cure of a knot, you should examine it and inquire about its beginning with an instrument called a probe, as will be explained in the following chapter.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	 "And this is the manner of inquiry for all abscesses and knots: you should take this instrument and insert it into the moistest part of the abscess, and you will move it little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the track.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	 And if running moisture of any color has been forgotten, then you should incise it with a superficial cut as I have said in other treatments.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	 If from the trace of the injury there is no moisture, then know that it is fat (or greasy).
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	 And make over it a dry cut in the shape of a cross like this:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	 As you have been taught, and suspend that with a hook, and carefully peel off the skin from all sides, and if possible, keep the hair or bag over it, and draw out that badness with a thread.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	 But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to draw out that evil, and very often this happens, and then you must extract it piece by piece until none of it remains.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	 Because if any part of it remains, either a little or a lot, the thread will return as I have said before.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And if you see that a small part of it remains, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, strengthen the wound, place over it what is called a cautery, and treat that with another treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	 And if the thread is large, then you should suture the two lips of it and treat it with what makes flesh.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	 If the vein is pulsating in contrast, or non-pulsating, then you should cut and fill the affected area with vitriol and let it sit for two days or three until the wound softens and the boiling of the blood subsides; then return to incise what remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	 It appears that this line is referencing a specific section or chapter in the text, with "Capitol" likely being used here to indicate a major division or heading within the treatise. "xlvi" suggests this is the 46th such section.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	 "Of the shapes of the instruments necessary for incision and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	 "Of these shapes of the instruments, there are three kinds: one is large, another is medium, and another is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	 The shape of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	 "The shape of the medium-sized instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	 "The shape of the small instrument is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	 "They should be made of iron, with pointed ends that fit well into the openings.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	 "And these are the shapes of the experienced [instruments], and they are named albard, and one of them is called burin.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	 "And there are three types, because some are large, others medium, and still others small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	 "The shape of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	 "The shape of the medium-sized instrument is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	 "The shape of the small instrument is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	 "It is suitable for those openings and exits, such as fistulas and abscesses, to enter within them by means of bones or other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	 And with this done, make round, large holes, like those made by large needles with which saddles are sewn, and they should be made of brass or iron or silver. The best ones are when they are made of brass.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	 And they are made with the experience of black feathers, which accord that through those openings the fistulas in their cavity should be opened, and reflected with their lightness along with these reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	 And of three kinds, because some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the width of the fistula and its narrowness.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	 Shape of a large lead weight:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	 Shape of a medium-sized lead weight:  (No need to translate "de plom" again, as it's already clear that the weights are made of lead)
Forma del experient petit de plom:	 Shape of a small lead weight:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	 The shapes of the hooks are of many kinds, for some are simple, with only one curve, and they come in three sizes: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	 And there are also curved hooks, and they come in three sizes.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 And of those, there are hooks with two curves, and they come in three sizes.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	 And there are three types of curvatures among them, and they are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	 All these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	 Shape of a large simple cyst, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	 Shape of a large simple cyst:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	 Shape of a small simple cyst, shape of it.
Forma de unci orp gran:	 Shape of a large varicose vein (orp is derived from the Latin "varix").
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	 Shape of a medium-sized varicose vein, shape of it.
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	 Shape of a small varicose vein, shape of it.
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	 A large cyst has two types of curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	 The medium-sized cyst also has two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	 The small cyst also has two curvatures.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	 A large cyst has three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	 The medium-sized cyst also has three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	 A small cyst also has three curvatures.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	 And these are the shapes of the scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped off, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	 Shape of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	 Shape of the medium-sized scalpel.
Forma de scapel pauc:	 Shape of a small scalpel.
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	 Based on the given text and pattern, here's a line-by-line translation:
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	 And these are the forms of almagidas, and there are three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	 The form of large almagida:
Forma de magda migier:	 The form of medium almagida:
Forma de magda pauc:	 The form of small almagida:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	 They are made of copper and resemble a beam with which an alcove is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	 And on the hidden extremity it is pierced with a stiletto and in that run the separated parts inside and out, as you wish, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	 The forms of stilettos, which are hidden among the aforementioned devices for the puncturing of tumors and are not perceived by patients, there are three types: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	 And these are the forms of those [stilettos]:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	 The forms of cupping glasses with which the flow of blood is cut off, and there are three types; large, medium, and small; their forms:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	 They are made of thin copper, round with some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	 And you must have these three types of cupping glasses - large, medium, and small - so that through those you can cut off the flow of blood quickly in necessity, and then it is not primarily medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	 And sometimes those tools are made of other small instruments resembling scissors for physicians, according to this shape; through which blood is cut when phlebotomy is performed, or there is an incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	 And sometimes they are made round according to this shape:
Capitol .xlvii.	 Chapter .47
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	 Of the care for men's breasts which resemble those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	 Sometimes the breasts of certain men become swollen when they begin to sleep, and then their breasts are also swollen and resemble those of women, and are often pendulous and flaccid.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And for those who have this, it is necessary to make an incision with a lunar section in this shape, from the line of B to the line of G, and then remove all the thickness, and fill the wound with medicine made from incarnation, and then sew up both lips of the wound with stitches, and care for him until he is cured.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 But if the breast falls to the sides and is softened by its size as it should be in women, then it should be cut into two halves above each side with two lunar-shaped incisions, each of which should be contained within the other at the end of each one, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this shape from the line of B to the line of G. And then remove the skin that is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary in the treatment until it is cured.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the distress of the patient and the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it there until it has dissolved the fat, and then treat what remains so that it may heal.
Capitol .xlviii.	 Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	 About the perforation of abscesses that occur under the nipple.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	 These abscesses that occur under the nipple are of the species of scrofula, hard, and contain a pus that is black.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	 And of these, some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess has been evacuated from the wound, then fill it with old cotton and leave it until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	 And then remove the cotton and treat it with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	 And if the abscess is of the species of glands and scrofula, then you should incise it in the same way as we have said in the section on scrofula as well.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	 If the wound has spread so much that it causes putrefaction, then administer to them a cautery as previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	 Chapter 49
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	 On the incision of abscesses that occur due to an arrow or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	 When the arrow has broken and the attached cord is firmly set, then many abscesses occur. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when an abscess is due to an arrow, it is long drawn out in the front of the body; and when you strike the abscess with these mentioned things, you feel in him what is called stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	 And that which is due to a vein is round in the middle of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	 And incision on this abscess is a mistake, especially in that which is below the armpits, in the groin, in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or in the head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	 But on that which is from them by inflammation of the orifice of the arrow, make an incision in the attached cord lengthwise; and immediately afterward, widen the incision with a hook near the arrow, and separate the tunic until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	 Based on the provided context and similarity to Latin and Romance languages, here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	 And then puncture the area between the two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood in it is released and the abscess is drained.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 And then administer treatment in the form of powder until the ligaments fall off; and then treat that area with appropriate ointments, continuing this treatment until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	 And if the abscess is caused by a severed vein, then it is necessary for you to hold water as close as possible to the abscess with your hand, and then insert the needle into the place where you have held your hand, and cause that [needle] to penetrate; and let there be a double thread in it until you extract it from the other side, and then tie off the abscess with a good ligature as I have told you regarding the grape ligature, with two parts and two ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	 But if you fear that the thread may be pulled out, then insert the thread with that needle through the entire abscess following the initial incision of the needle, and strengthen your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	 Then drain the abscess in its middle part until all of its contents have been evacuated; at that point you will incise the excess skin and let whatever is connected to it remain.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Based on the context and the similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's my best guess for the translation:
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	 "Chapter 1 about abscesses that occur due to twisted nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	 Here is a translation of the given sentence:
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	 And it is made on the patient's back in the places of the buttocks or the heel, or in any place where the joints are swollen.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	 And it is a serious abscess, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and it is located on the back without inflammation. When it is narrow with intensity, the patient feels like they are in a state of shock.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	 And it is not an abscess added in the front of the body, and therefore it is left alone, and it swells in all directions and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	 Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not appropriate to be closed with iron, because it will quickly cause contracture.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	 But those that are on the head or forehead should be left alone with a bandage.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	 But if it is a small abscess, then take that one with scissors and cut it off by reason.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if it is large, then you suspend that one with a hook, and remove the pus, and then lift that off; and close the wound with stitches, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	 Chapter II
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	 Of the incision of an abscess which occurs in the person who has one in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	 This is a complex sentence that describes some sort of medical condition or phenomenon in the body. Let's break it down line by line:
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	 "And I have already seen one, and in their belly were two threads which looked like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those whites, for a small reason.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	 "And already the lips of those were turned inside out and split, and moisture flowed from them constantly.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	 "So I inserted those and found in one eighteen worms, and in the other six worms.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	 "And the operation for their insertion is that you consider if the patient is moist, and the color of the wound is white, moist, and subtle; then you insert them with a wide spatula, and there should be cauteries in your presence in the fire, because many times the moisture of it must be expelled from him; and if you see blood, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	 "And if the patient is weak and fearful, be careful with inserting iron; instead take freshly made lead fillet and strengthen the wound with that in the manner we have mentioned; and let it sit for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	 "And then tighten the lead thread in the constriction of the wound; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead greatly in the thread, until it is cut and falls out by itself without effort.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	 "But if it is of large size, then at its appearance there is cause for fear and dread, especially if it is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	 "But it is possible that you cut off most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	 "And then care for the patient until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	 "And be careful not to cut one that is dark in color, with little feeling, and growing slowly, for it could be cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	 "And I come to mind about the crab in this manner.
Capitol .lii.	 "Chapter 52
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	 "On the treatment of an inflamed navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	 "An inflamed navel can be caused by several reasons; either by fissures of the intestine which is on the belly, and from it comes out the tissue or bowel as in other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or artery as mentioned before, or by trapped wind within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	 "But if it is due to a fissure of the intestine and the protrusion of the tissue, then the color of the swelling will resemble that of the body; and it is painless, and appears in various places.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	 And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then place the person in the position we have previously described, with even more intense diversity. As you press on that area, as mentioned, it will be hidden, and then return; and it is quite easy for them to stay in that position, and it is greatly enhanced by a very hot bath and strenuous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	 But if it is due to humidity, then it is like a lion and does not hide when pressed with your hand, nor is it constricted or reduced.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	 And if it is due to blood, then you will see the abscess appear with blackish discoloration.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	 But if it is due to rotten flesh, then the abscess will be heavy, large, and hard, and will feel like a lump according to its size.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	 But if it is due to gas, then touching it will feel firm.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	 And the treatment in this case is to consider whether the umbilical prominence is due to an injury to an artery or vein, or to gas; then it is necessary for you to be prohibited from treating it, because there is fear and danger as has been taught to you in the chapter where I spoke about abscesses caused by injury to an artery or vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	 Here's the translation of the provided text:
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	 And then carefully spread the middle of the aposteme on the cloth and insert your finger into that indentation; and if you have found and secured it with the cloth, then extract the hernia and push it back to its original place inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	 And if you have found the cloth, then grasp it with tweezers; and cut off its excess parts.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	 However, if it is contrary to your bowels or veins, then go around that area, and return to your operation; take two needles and thread them with two strong threads, insert the needles in the circle you have made around the aposteme in the manner of a cross, making them penetrate; then strengthen the aposteme in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place open so that the stretched flesh may close on its own; or cut it when it is healed and has closed, and then cure it with water from appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	 And if the protuberance of the navel is only flesh or due to moisture, then it is necessary for you to open the aposteme as we have said and extract the blood or moisture that you find in it, and then cure it with water that consolidates the place.
Capitol .liii.	 It looks like you've provided the title of a chapter or section (Capitol .liii.) rather than a complete sentence for translation. Could you please provide a full sentence from the text that I can help you translate?
De curacio de cranc.	 From the treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	 We have already said in the division about the species of cancer and how it is treated with medicines, and that a cure with iron should be avoided to prevent it from becoming ulcerated; we have also spoken about cancer occurring in the womb and the caution required for its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	 And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, such as in the breast, which is located in the mammary glands or in the hips and resembles the limbs, and should be removed entirely, especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	 But when it is old and large, one should not approach it, because I have not seen anyone heal from that, nor do I know of another who has been successful in doing so.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	 And the operation on it is when it is removed as we have said, that you should precede and let the patient fast and purge with black bile several times, and then bleed them if there is a clear swelling found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	 Then prepare the patient with the preparation in which the operation is located, and then proscribe for him the foods that are beneficial for this; and then empty from every part with a good enema until there is no cause left of its roots.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	 And let the blood run, and do not cut it off hastily, and press on the areas, and cleanse the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument suitable for you among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 But if there is an issue with thick blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize it until the bleeding stops, and then treat it with another treatment until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	 Chapter .4
De curacio de ydropici.	 About the care of those suffering from dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	 We have already mentioned in the division, the types of dropsy caused by water and the signs of each type, and the treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	 And that which is cured with iron is only the type of edema alone, and it is not appropriate to use iron for the type of tympanites or for the type of ascites, because this is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	 And when you have treated this type of dropsy tympanites with medicines and your treatment does not work, then consider that if the patient has already been weakened, or if they also have another type of dropsy such as cough or abdominal pain and similar, then be careful not to treat them with iron, because there is danger in this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	 Certainly! Here's the translation of your provided sentence:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	 It appears that the text is written in an older form of Spanish or Catalan. Here's a line-by-line translation into English:
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	 "And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, because at that time you should make an incision with the knife away from the navel for about three times the thickness of the fingers, on the right side of the patient above the pubic bone.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	 "But if the generation of dropsy is due to a liver disorder, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers' width.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	 "And if the generation [of dropsy] is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the left side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	 "And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side where the patient wants it, so that the superfluities do not run to that weak place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	 "And then pierce the intestine with the instrument and insert it into that incision, and lift your hand with the spatula between the intestine and the abdominal wall, and you will excise it; and if its quantity is of a fingernail or less.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	 "And then pierce the abdominal wall until the spatula reaches the empty place, which is where the water [or fluid] is located.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	 "And then extract that and insert an instrument of this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	 And it resembles a delicate silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or bronze. At its lowest part there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two on one side and one on the other. The end of it is cut in the manner of a pen, as you can see.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	 And at the upper end of it there is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, they immediately place it on the instrument, which instantly evacuates the water in a moderate quantity. Because if you evacuate more than is necessary at the time, the patient will die soon due to the loss of their vital spirit, or they may suffer from shock, which is close to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	 But evacuate according to the patient's strength, and according to what their pulse and complexion indicate to you.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	 And after removing the instrument, retain the water that has been extracted, because as soon as it is retained by the chain that holds the hole at the top of the instrument, which I have described to you and recommended that you pierce in this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	 And then repeat the procedure on the following day if you see that the patient is tolerating it, and extract a small amount of water each time, and do this for several days with caution, and beware of mistakes so that no water remains except a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	 And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen near the exit of the water, as I have recounted in what has preceded this.
Capitol .lv.	 Chapter 55
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	 Of the care for children born with non-perforated urinary tract locations.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	 Sometimes one of the children is born from the mother's womb with an imperforated (or very narrow, or not in its proper place) urinary tract.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	 Therefore, it is necessary to make a small incision in the infant as soon as he is born with a very fine needle in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	 And then place a thin lead wire in the hole and tie it off, and leave it there for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	 And when the infant wants to urinate, remove the wire and let him urinate; then replace the wire.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	 And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine flowing over this spot will not escape through the opening.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	 But that one whose hole is narrow should be treated with a lead wire, as we have said, for several days until it widens. ️
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	 But those in whom the hole is not in its proper place are said to have this condition, which occurs because, of these, the one born with the hole at the end of the penis cannot urinate inside the foreskin until he raises his penis with his hand on top; and it is not a hereditary condition, because the semen cannot reach the mother naturally, and it is a very serious illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	 And be careful in your operation to control the bleeding, for many times this happens; and place something on the wound to stop the bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	 Chapter 56.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	 Of the disease which occurs in the foreskin of the head of the penis, and of corruption, blackening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	 Many times this disease occurs in the penis and is known as phimosis.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	 And of these, one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	 Non-malignant, it is necessary that you suspend with a fine thread and cut it until it heals completely; then place a cotton pad soaked in Egyptian ointment on it; and then treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	 And if the disease is malignant and black in color, then it is necessary that you apply cautery near its edge and root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	 However, if the disease is in the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the disease is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then it is necessary that you remove the disease that is inside at first until it is consolidated; and then treat the one that is outside, because when you treat both the foreskin and the prepuce together, it is not certain that it will not be cut.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	 Sure, let's translate this into English:
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	 And care for him with another treatment until he is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	 But if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	 for a healing cautery is useful in two situations at once, that is with blood flow and with the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	 And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed all at once, then you must insert a lead pipe into the meat of the foreskin so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	 In the adhesion of the foreskin with the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose foreskin is healthy, and upon whom circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or an abscess) it is necessary that you scrape with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	 And if it is difficult to scrape these exactly, then you must scrape some of the skin from the head of the penis and the foreskin with a spatula, and this is because the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily perforated by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	 And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a very thin needle that has already been moistened in cold water to prevent it from sticking again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	 And then treat it with a strong styptic until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	 Chapter 57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	 Of the cleaning of children and of the care for those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	 Circumcision is not like the treatment of other diseases: however, since it depends on our action and will, and mainly concerns infants, it is necessary to choose the best method and easiest way for them to regain their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	 Therefore, I say that the ancients did not call it circumcision in any of their books because they did not use it in their laws. The only reason we have acquired this practice through experimentation is that I have found the majority of skilled practitioners and barbers using a razor and tweezers for both circumcision and cleaning, and they use bandages with thread and closure with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	 And I have tried all these methods and found none better for cleaning with scissors, and bandaging with thread as in closure with the nail, because many times the glans escapes above, because the foreskin has two layers, and the lower layer remains, and it is very easy to slip again and cause pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	 And with the cleansing that is done using alphecatis, which are digital and used by shoemakers, it is not ensured that the incision of the end of the male member will be closed properly, because it can easily enter into its hole.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	 But in an operation with a nail, avoid iron and do not let it corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	 And the child's umbilical cord is short by nature, and many times it has been seen in this way that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen this myself.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	 But the cleansing that is done with scissors and bandages with thread, the good result of this experiment was discovered by me, because the scissors have a proportionate incision, for which reason the sharpness that is above is also like the sharpness below; and thus as you press your hand so proportionately between the two sharp edges, and cut in accordance with a comparison at one time; and it is made compression of the thread with a figure containing the umbilical cord from all sides, with which there is no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	 And the way of the first operation is that you make the child lie down as much as possible if it is one of those that understands a little, do not do anything else except tie the thread in its navel alone, and leave it until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	 And then make him happy in every way possible that he may receive his understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	 And then have the person stay between your hands, prepared and not frightened; and hide the scissors in your hand or behind your foot, so that the child does not see those or any of the other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	 And then insert your hand into the child's penis and blow air into it, pulling out any accumulated dirt or impurities from within.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	 And then tie the marked area with a double thread, and then tie a second ligature a little lower than that, and then take hold of the ends of the threads and press the place of the ligature firmly beneath it, cutting between two ligatures.  (This passage describes a procedure for tying off blood vessels.)
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	 And then gently raise the penis and remove the tip of the tube; and then allow the blood to flow out little by little, for it is better that way; and place powder on top, and on the powder place a cloth in which fresh olive oil has been sprinkled; and leave that on until the next day; and treat it with treatment until it heals.  (This passage describes a procedure for treating a wound or incision on the penis.)
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	 The form of the forceps for modification is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	 The nails of the forceps should not be sharp; instead, one set of nails should be blunt and the other set should be sharp, so that the nail of the claw is not protruding, and the length of both sets of nails should be equal to the length of two handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	 However, the mistake in modification is that you should not completely or partially remove the inner chain; instead, you should insert it back into its proper place.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	 Therefore, you should extend that (the inner chain) at the time of your choice with your nail before the opening of the place and insert it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	 And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a hook and insert it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	 But if three days have passed and the swelling remains below the inflamed area, then leave it until the inflammation subsides, carefully excise it, and insert it as you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	 And be careful with the head of the rod, for that will not be good for it.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	 Therefore, treat (the area) with a powder that solidifies the wound, as we have recommended in the section on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	 And if he has been cut too deeply from behind, and if you follow the guidelines above, it will not harm him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	 But care for him as we have said until he is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	 Chapter .58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	 Of the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	 Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or clotted blood, or by sand or flesh, and similar things as we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	 And if the urine is not dissolved and the retention of it is due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be placed on his back.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	 And then place the patient's feet on his back and stretch his belly from the area above his back, and let the patient hold his legs as much as he can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	 Therefore, at that point, the neck of the bladder is narrowed to expel the stone towards the rear, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	 And if it is not dissolved with what we have said and the cause is severe on the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction from him with an instrument called a siringua, which looks like this: It should be of silver and hollow like a goose quill, as thin as a crow's feather, about a palm and a half long, and with a fine hole at the tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	 And the method of extracting urine through this is that you take the doubled thread and tie it to the patient's extremity with good firmness; and insert the ends of the thread into the part below the penis, and cut off any excess from the thread with scissors, but insert it firmly into the cannula. And then extend the penis with a border and an egg white mixture.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	 And have the patient sit on the chair, and puncture his bladder and penis with a mixture of oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	 And then insert the penis with ease until it reaches the root of the glans; and then bend the penis upward toward the navel; and then push the penis into that; and then push it in until it reaches the bladder, and this will make the patient urinate freely, and if this is not done in this order, but goes to the wrong opening.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	 And then gradually extend the thread with the wool, because the urine will wet the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	 Then extract that [thread] and use it for the cure of urine retention. Use a penis-shaped instrument, do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	 I don't see any text after "Capitol .lix." Please provide the next line or paragraph for translation.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	 About the method of enema with a bladder and similar instruments, which must be suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood, or it is constricted by pustules, and you wish to distill waters and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	 until its tip is blunt, so that it can be closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	 And on it there are three holes: two on one side, as you see.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	 At the beginning there is a concave space, in which what is inserted is contained, and it should be sized according to the amount that is filled into it, without addition, until when some cause pulls out the humors from it, it is pulled out, and when it is expelled, water is poured into it, and when it is expelled for a long time, according to what the clampcedra does with which naphtha is injected in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	 Therefore, when you wish to inject humors into the bladder, insert the tip of the clampcedra into the humors and pull with it the water that is inserted into the holes above, because the humors are pulled into the concavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	 And then insert the extremity of the clapper into the penis as we have recommended in the surgery; and then expel the moisture with water that you are using, because that moisture will reach the bladder immediately, and the patient will feel that.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	 The shape of the subtle catheter with which the bladder is catheterized, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	 And it should be made of silver or tin, whose tip should resemble a small feather, and after that, insert the tube inside gently.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	 And then take a goose bladder, and place in it the moisture that you want to introduce into the bladder, and then tie it between two with a strong double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	 And then insert the extremity of the catheter into the penis.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	 And then press your hand against the bladder with the moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	 But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; and perforate it all around its circumference; and then insert strong thread into those holes, so that they are turned over; and then add the circle as is customary, because you place in it the water that you want from the moistures, oils and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	 And then you bind him to the instrument and do it similarly as you have done with the bladder, and press with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	 **Capítulo LX** (Chapter 60)
De extraccio de peyra.	 **About the Extraction of Stones.**
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	 We have already discussed in the division the species of stones and their treatment with medications, as well as the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of these.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	 And we have discussed the stone in which operation with the hand and incision is performed.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	 And the stone generated in the bladder itself is that which is placed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	 And I will now describe it with a clear and concise explanation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	 Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder mostly occurs in children; and one of its signs is that the urine exiting from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and it appears with sand in it; and the patient often scratches his penis, and there are frequent painful movements, and it usually develops quickly; and with this, you will see the buttocks in frequent movements.  (Note: "yeys" is a misspelling of "veys")
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	 And healing is easier for children up to the age of fourteen, and it is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	 But in young people, it is more likely because they are among them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	 And of that for which the stone is larger and the cure is easier; if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	 Therefore, when we come to the cure of this, it is necessary at the beginning that the patient be cleansed with a clyster which will extract all the crack that is in his intestines; for that crack sometimes prevents the expulsion of the stone due to its search for it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	 And then the patient should be taken by the feet and placed upside down in order that the stone may descend into the mouth of the bladder or that it may jump out of its place sometimes.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	 Then make that cut between your hands ready, and let his hands be under his things, so that the bladder may be entirely made to decline towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	 And then seek out all of it and bring all of it out.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	 Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then cut immediately with a scalpel over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	 Here's the translation for the given sentence:
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	 And you should apply the stone until it is under your tongue.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	 And turn that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	 Then press on that with your tongue and expel it outside the body through the incision site.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	 And command the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend the patient's knees upwards with their right hand, and with their other hand lift up the sheet that is under the patient's knees, in the area where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 Then insert a spatula like this one, which has this shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	 And cut into it what is between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle, but more towards the left side of the hip; and let the incision be on that stone and your finger be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the external incision is wide and internal narrow according to how much of the stone can be removed from him, and no more, for if you press too hard with your finger that is in the anus, the stone will come out effortlessly.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	 And know that there is a stone with angles and edges, for which reason the excretion of it becomes difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	 And that substance is like a grain of sand, and it is round, and its excretion is easy.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	 Therefore, if it is the one with angles and edges, insert it into the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	 And if it is not so angularly shaped, then you should contrive over it, or strengthen over it with a suitable device, whose end should be like a file with which you strengthen over the stone, and do not let any of it out; or insert a fine instrument with a curved tip underneath.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	 But if you cannot do this, then widen the hole a little, and if you see blood flow, cut it off strongly with powdered vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	 But if the stone is more than one, then at first you put your hand on the bladder’s opening, and then cut over it; and then push a little near this; and do the same if there are more than two stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	 And if the stone is very large, it is unwise to cut it with a large incision, because two things may happen to the patient: either they will die or they will develop continuous dripping of urine, because the place is not completely healed.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	 Sure, I can help with that. Here's the translation:
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	 Therefore, once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe gel and dragon's blood, and close it securely.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	 Place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rosemary oil and cold water, on the affected area to help reduce inflammation.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	 Then lay the patient on their back, and do not remove the bandage until the third day has passed.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	 And when you have removed it, wash the area with water and plenty of oil, and then treat it with finch oil and diachylon ointment until it heals.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	 However, if the wound develops a painful, burning abscess, and it appears as though blood is frozen in the bladder and urine cannot be passed (this is known by the passage of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains it will cause the bladder to rot and lead to putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply all kinds of spices, using whatever is most suitable for the patient's treatment until they are healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	 And it is necessary during all hours of treatment that you lift both cushions and adjust the medications placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if the stone is small and it is in the bladder, and it has been placed inside, and excretion of urine is prohibited, then cure that with water as I have recommended before, so that you do not reach dryness; because excessive use of this treatment is accused of causing dryness. And I have tested this, which is that you take a ferr alfelut perforator, and its form is like this:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	 with a triangular tip, sharp, inserted into a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	 Then take thread, and tie the bladder below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	 Then insert the iron into the bladder, piercing with ease until the perforator reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	 And rotate the perforator with your hand around that stone little by little, and pierce its hole until you make it penetrate from the other side; because the urine is immediately released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	 Then press your hand over where the stone has exited from the outside of the bladder, because that is sealed and drained with urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	 If this treatment is not within your ability for any reason that prevents you from doing so, then take a rope beneath the stone and another rope on top of the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	 And then place it on the stone in that forked area between two ligaments.
E aprop extratz aquela.	 And then extract it from there.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	 And then unbind the ligament and cleanse the coagulated blood that is formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	 And it is not necessary to tie the rope under the stone, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other rope on top, because when the rope is untied near the edge of the stone, the chain returns to its place and covers the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	 And for this reason it is necessary for you, when you take the rope from above, to lift the chain to the upper parts, or you must return with your compliment, and cover the wound in this way as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	 Chapter 61
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	 On the Extraction of Stones from Women
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	 Stones in women are rarely formed
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	 However, if a stone is seen in any of them, then the treatment of it is difficult and is forbidden by too many reasons.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	 "One of the reasons is that the woman is very young and a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	 "The second reason is that you do not find a woman who is knowledgeable enough to recognize herself when she is chaste, or one of the women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	 "The third reason is that you do not find a woman skilled enough in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	 "The fourth reason is that the location of the incision on the stone in women is distant from the location of the stone, requiring an advanced incision, which is feared.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	 "But if necessity requires you to do this, then it is necessary that you take a midwife who is very skilled, and she is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	 "But if you are deprived of her, then seek a physician who is skilled and subtle, or present a mature woman well experienced in the ways of women, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	 "Therefore, have her present, and command her to do everything you ask of her, from the initial investigation about the stone; the reason for this is that she should check if the woman is a virgin, in which case she should put her finger into the woman's vagina and search for the stone." ➤
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	 If it is found, cut it off next to its tip, and then command him to sit on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	 But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and press on the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder and squeezing it strongly.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	 So if it is found, it must be gradually pulled from the orifice of the bladder to the groin with all its might until it reaches the height of the hip.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	 And then sit on that projection at the top of the vagina until it reaches the height of the hip, wherever it may be to him, and place the stone in that location, and let his finger not be removed from the stone while cutting below it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	 And the incision should be small at first; and then insert the reed into that incision, and if it feels the stone, then adjust the incision according to the amount by which it knows the stone will come out of there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	 And know that the species of stones are many: for there are small and large ones, smooth and rough, long and round, and those with edges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	 Therefore, you should know which spices are from him based on what you indicate about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 If you see blood flow, apply crushed vitriol to the area and let it sit for an hour until the blood is stopped, then return to your operation until the stone is removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	 And make sure to prepare with you the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be assisted by them during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	 If you see blood flow and know that the bleeding is from the artery that has been cut, then place powder on the area and tighten it with clamps and stricture down, and do not irritate it; leave the stone and do not remove it, because the patient will quickly die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	 Then immediately treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	 Therefore, once the bleeding has subsided after several days and the area heals, then you can return to your operation until the stone is removed.
Capitol lxii.	 Chapter 62
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	 On incision for inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	 An aqueous hernia is nothing more than an accumulation of moisture in the white scrotum that remains below the spermatic cord containing the testicle, and it is called a scrotum.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	 And sometimes it is in the proper tissue that nature has prepared for the baby, from its exit until another child arrives; and it is the chain of generation between the white cloth we mentioned, and this is not early but late.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	 And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in children, because to them this material is infused, and sometimes it happens due to blows on the children.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	 And this humidity has many colors, because its color can be tending toward yellow or red, or pink, or black and dirty, or watery white, and the latter is the most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	 And the signs by which one knows that this accumulation of water is occurring are these: because if it is in the white cloth we mentioned, then the abscess is roundish and somewhat elongated like a figure of an egg, and the genitalia appear, because the humidity surrounds it on all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	 And if the humidity is in the proper tissue, then the abscess is round like the shape of an egg and therefore it is believed to be another child.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	 And if the humidity is between the chain of the genitals and the white cloth, then it falls between the two.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	 And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you test the color of the humidity in the abscess with a glass vial that is clear; and according to what appears in the residue of the glass, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	 Therefore, when we come to the treatment of him with iron, it is necessary that we command the patient to be bloodletted if this is possible for you, and then empty his body of blood.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	 Then he should be laid on his back on a somewhat high pillow, and soft cloths should be placed under him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	 And then sit on the left side of him, and command the servant to follow on his right side, which extends its leg to one of the two sides at the groin of the thighs and at the opening of the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	 And then take a wide spatula and cut the groin of the thighs from the middle place for the length up to near the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	 And let the section be made straight and equally distant from the line that follows the pubic hair of the thighs, until it reaches the white bladder.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	 And cut that, and observe, and guard yourself by this, that you do not cut it; and your incision with which you cut must be made so that it is suspended with the most subtle and careful examination of the cut according to the amount possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	 "And then puncture the bladder full of water with a wide hole, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	 "And then separate between two lips of the section with a hook, and extract the bladder in parts above; and do not touch the cord, the testicles comprehending, and cut the bladder in that manner as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	 "And cut that [bladder] with its entirety or in pieces, especially the thin part of it, for if you do not carefully examine the incision of it, it is not certain that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	 "But if the egg proceeds from that outside of its cord during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the bladder, return it inside, and then adjust the two lips of the cord of the testicles with a suture, and then heal that as well as the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	 "And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary that you tie off the vessels which are above the suspension, and extract the egg, and then heal that with the water we have mentioned.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	 But if the water is divided into two equal parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part in the same way as you did with the other one; and if it seems to you that it is a single operation, then you do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	 Then you clean the blood and insert between the sections wool soaked in oil or olive oil; and place another piece of wool outside, which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over two cushions and the lower part of the belly. Place cloths and poultices on top and bind them securely with a bandage according to this method:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	 And then take two pieces of cloth and dampen them with wool soaked in this manner; make the ends with which you press with cotton or dampened wool, and attach them securely to the crotch of the undergarments, one end taking from the buttocks to the back, and the second taking from the groin area. The two ends should be placed on two cushions below and two other ends on two pillows, and all the binding should be secured in the crotch of the undergarments.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	 And sometimes this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery instead of a knife cut; and it is that you take a fine surgical cautery and inscribe with it the cord of the testicles, and it should be ignited according to what we have recommended until the white bladder containing the water is exposed. Then you take a cautery of this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	 ...and it resembles the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	 Then you perforate that bladder with it, and keep it ignited until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	 Then you extend the bladder with hooks, and scrape it with hooks, and scrape it with a fine ignited cautery; and cut that as much as possible until you eradicate everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	 Know that this operation is safer and less likely to cause bleeding, and better than an operation with a knife cut.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	 However, if you encounter an abscess during the knife cut or during the cautery, or if there is bleeding, then it is necessary that you treat whatever difficulty arises for you with the cure that is appropriate to it, as will be said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	 Now it's time to lift the patient onto some raised surface. Then, pierce the abscess in its lowest part with a lance, and hold the puncture according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	 And let the opening be wide enough for all the water to flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	 Then place a cloth over the area and tie it tightly, so that the remaining water can drain.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	 And then care for it until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	 But if there is resistance to the expulsion of water at that time when you puncture it: and this happens only because the white layer in the orifice of the wound causes resistance and prevents the exit of water, then you must insert into the wound a pen or instrument with which water is extracted from bladders; the shape of which is previously described. Or adjust to the opening of the wound a small tube.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	 And know that the water will return, and it is expected to do so within a year or less; and when it does, then it should be punctured in the same manner, because the patient will thus spend their days in this way.
Capitol .lxiii.	 **Capítulo 63.**
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	 **Sobre la incisión en hernias carnosas y su tratamiento.**
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	 **Sabes que en la incisión de esta hernia hay un riesgo significativo de pérdida y daño en los tejidos más importantes; por lo tanto, a mí me parece mejor la extracción de ella para salvar al paciente.**
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	 **Y yo recuerdo la operación y los procedimientos para tratar los abscesos.**
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	 **Así que digo que los abscesos se forman en los cuerpos cuyos tejidos son blandos y esto sucede por varias razones: ya sea por una aguda inflamación, que se infiltra en los tejidos, o por un golpe.** ️
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	 **Y el color del absceso corresponde al color del cuerpo afectado, y no se siente mucho dolor, pero es un absceso grave.**
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	 **Y el absceso de tipo lápiz es oscuro y no se siente mucho dolor en él.**
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	 **Y algunas veces se forma debido a un nódulo en los vasos sanguíneos y por la inflamación de estos, de modo que ya se recuerda su presencia, o por la inflamación de las venas.**
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	 Based on the pattern and context from the previous sentences, here's a possible translation for the given sentence:
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	 Based on the context and the similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided sentence:
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	 Therefore, if the egg has already become solid with those meat additions, then you should extract the egg and insert that (new mixture).
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	 If there is an adhesion due to some cause of the intestine or between what is between the bowels, then you should free all that adhesion and insert it through a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	 However, if there is a native flesh growth at the site of the adhesion that is behind, then you should insert everything that comes from it and extract the egg as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Therefore, once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in oil and wine; and then care for it with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	 Chapter .64
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	 About the treatment of a hernia that affects the bladder.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	 A bladder hernia is an abscess wrapped in a membrane similar to the scrotum, with softening of the testicles, and makes it difficult for the patient to move or walk.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	 And in the treatment of this illness there is fear because of what it is preceded by.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	 However, we must say that the operation on it should be done according to what the first (doctors) did.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	 And I say that it is necessary to place the patient on an elevated seat; and then separate the testicles from the scrotum; and then take hold of the penis with your said fingers and with the thumbs that are known at the base of the penis; and let another minister assist you, and stretch these (testicles) with great force.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	 And then make an incision with a sharp scalpel transversely to the right of the vessels until they are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	 And then remove all parts in the same way that we have described in the removal of arrows which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	 And then place in those a double-threaded needle, and tie it first at the top of the places where the veins are cut, and tie it again at their base.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	 And then make a straight incision in the middle of those according to the length of the body, and extract whatever is accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	 And then treat the wound with the same care used for other wounds in which you wish to encourage healing so that the veins may close, because one of two things will happen: either it will be healed or it will not be healed by this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Capitol .lxv.	 Chapter 65
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	 "On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	 "The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that opens in the cipher extended over the belly from some of the angles of the wonders of the belly, so that descending the intestines from that rupture reach some of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	 "And this rupture is either of the cipher or its exit, and these two species occur for many reasons: a blow, a jump, a shout, an elevation due to some serious cause, or similar.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	 "The sign of this, when it is due to extension of the cipher, is that it occurs little by little over a long time and does not occur suddenly, and there is an abscess inside the belly because the cipher presses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	 "And the sign of it is when it is due to section of the cipher, for at first it causes intense sudden pain; and there is a different abscess appearing under the navel, which is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and its body in the parts outside the cipher.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	 "And sometimes the tunic is forgotten with the intestine, and this type of intestinal hernia is called 'sacculated'.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	 And sometimes it is caused by flatulence, and sometimes the intestine has a tear in it, which is retained here, and this is very detrimental to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	 And in the treatment of this kind of disease with iron, there is danger, so it should be avoided.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	 And the method of operating on this is that you command the patient to return the intestine with their hand to the inner parts of its cavity if it obeys the return, and then place them on their side between your hands, and lift their legs up.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	 And then stop the spermatic cord which is the cord of the testicles on top, and cut the spermatic cord all along its length; and then place in two lips of the section two needles as needed to open the section with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	 And if, according to your ability, the opening from which the egg comes out can be enlarged.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	 And then carefully remove that piece of skin which is left after the spermatic cord, until the hard white skin of each part is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	 Based on the provided context and similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	 Based on the context of the previous lines, it seems that this passage is discussing a medical procedure related to intestinal issues or hernias. Here's a line-by-line translation attempt:
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	 "But if you find any swelling in him, then expose it to the belly and leave it there.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	 "Then take a needle with a thick thread made of x threads, and insert it into the back of the scrotum, which is below the testicles, called section; then cut the ends that protrude from the thread until they are four threads long, and then bind some of them together in the shape of a cross; and tie it tightly to the scrotum with two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	 "Then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them tightly together so that none of the vessels can transmit any cause, lest an abscess occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	 "And place another ligature a little below the first one, three fingerbreadths away; and leave these two ligatures on the scrotum that is below the testicles, with the thickness of a finger, and cut off all the remaining parts in a circular shape, and remove the egg.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	 "Then make an incision in the area below the testicles, through which blood and pus will flow as we have described.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	 And immediately administer wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and administer the bandage that we have recommended (and sometimes a white cloth is cauterized, which we mentioned earlier for fear of excessive bleeding, because this often happens). Then leave the bandage until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	 But if the bleeding is delayed, then dip a cloth in hot water and place it on the area until it falls off, as we said before.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 And then treat the wound with the other usual treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	 Chapter 66
De hernia ventosa.	 Of Windy Hernia
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	 In this case of windy hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has been bold enough to treat it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	 And the first ones said that it should be treated in the same way as we have recommended for hernias with air; which is that you tie the vessels near the incision gently on it; and then dry in the middle of the area around the abscess with water that opens that, until the vessels fall off.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	 And treat the wound as we said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	 Chapter 67
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	 About the dislocation that occurs in the joints.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	 Sometimes there is a fracture in the joints as we have said, and it protrudes from the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	 And [the physician] should not give any cause to the intestines for the intestines; and if he does, that is little; and it returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	 But if the time is prolonged with that, there is an appropriate fissure in the hip until it descends into the hip; and this happens because of the extension of the hip which is in the joints as we have said, which cause is that the hip is extended, and then it becomes soft and the place is swollen and protruding.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	 And its cure is with a cautery as has been previously stated in this account.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	 And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and that is [for] the patient to lie on his back between your hands, and then dry the place of the fracture of the protruding swellings with a section according to the length following the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	 And then strengthen the white hip which is under the skin until it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of your provided text:
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	 And then you should lift the two prominent places at the end of the thigh bone and secure them with stitches, one with the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	 And then remove the end of the thigh bone and do not cut off all of the hip, nor extend the hollow, nor any other cause as I will teach you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	 And then treat it with the treatment of wounds, and when you have cut the threads, clean that area and restore the wound until it is healed; because the hip is constricted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	 A cautery is better in this place, for it is closer to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	 Chapter 68
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	 On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	 Many times the cord of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh between that is softened, and it is feared for him.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	 Therefore, it is necessary for the one who treats this condition to make the patient lie according to his back, and cut off all of the softened cord above the natural cord; and then join together two lips with stitches.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	 And if you wish, in the beginning, soften the excess of the cord with three or four boilings and secure it firmly with stitches.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	 Then incise between the stitches; then treat with other treatments until it is healed and the threads fall off.
Capitol .lxix.	 Chapter 69.
De castracio.	 Of Castration
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	 You should know that castration is forbidden in our law; however, it has been reported to me that I remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except for two reasons: one is so that it may be known by the physician when he is asked about it, that he may know the treatment of the man on whom it happens. The other reason is that we often have need of castration of other animals for our livelihood, such as horses, oxen, pigs and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	 Therefore, I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by torsion or by incision and cutting.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	 But in the case of castration by torsion, the way to perform the operation is to make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles are softened and lengthened and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	 And then take those with your hand into yourself until they are resolved and do not appear under the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	 But in case of castration done by cutting and sectioning, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press its spermatic cord with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	 And then tie the suspensory ligament, and make an incision on each testicle with one cut until both testicles are processed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	 Then cut those bladders that you have each peeled off.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	 And do not leave any of these on the intestines for any reason, except the thin membrane that is above the bladder.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	 And this method of castration is better when done by squeezing, because squeezing strongly leaves nothing of the testicles so that the animal does not desire coitus.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	 Then tend to the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	 Chapter 70
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	 On the treatment of hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	 Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when it appears that the space between the spermatic cord of the testicles is like a woman's vulva, which has hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	 "And sometimes from that place there is a release of urine which is in the scrotum.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	 "However, in women there is a kind: and it is that the vulva of the woman on the penis is similar to two testicles of a man, a little smaller at the opening like the foreskin of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	 "And the treatment consists of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	 "And it is necessary that you insert those fleshy parts until the swelling subsides, and then treat them with the remedies for other ailments.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	 "And in the second type of men where there is urine in the scrotum, there is no cure or treatment for it.
Capitol .xxi.	 "Chapter 21
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	 "On swelling and prominent flesh due to causes of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	 "Prominent flesh due to natural causes should be compressed until it resolves, and care should be taken; sometimes in some women it becomes so prominent that it spreads like in men and continues during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	 "Therefore, you should hold the swelling with your hand or a cloth and insert it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	 And do not hesitate at the end (of the procedure), especially on the vein of the face, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	 Then care for it with treatments for wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	 But flesh that is born is flesh that is born within the horrible matrix of the mother until it fills it, and it leaves the parts outside according to its appearance (and for this reason some call it "tail-like illness"); therefore we must cut as we would cut a leech, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	 Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	 On the treatment of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	 Arthritis is when the vagina of a woman is not pierced, or it is too narrow.
E es o natural o accidental.	 And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	 Accidental is due to previous illness, and this can be caused by poorly matched flesh or subtle or thick sperm.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	 And it occurs either in the womb of the mother, or in her hips, or in her upper abdomen, or in her lower abdomen, and it prevents sexual intercourse, pregnancy, and childbirth, and greatly hinders menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	 And the recognition of that is done by observing the mother, if the opening is apparent, then it is certain; but if not, then you should search for it with your words or with a ray.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	 But if the opening is subtle and close to the two lips, then you cut and break it open.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	 And place them over the two lips of the vulva, and then place your index fingers on both sides at the same time.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	 And let the woman be on her back, with her legs spread, and then separate the two lips with force until that subtle opening is broken and the orifice is open.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	 And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it on the spot, and have a man watch over it during the day to prevent the cut from healing.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	 But if the opening is large and thick, then you should cut it with a scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	 But if the opening is fleshy, then suspend it with a hook, and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	 And you should have with you the medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as agave, dragon's blood, and mugwort, mixed with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	 And then administer a wide lead canula so that the wound does not close too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	 And keep it there for several days, and administer some dry lint to it.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	 And then it should be treated with the other method of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	 And sometimes this happens during childbirth to other tissues, and then you should proceed in the same manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	 But if this is due to cancerous abscesses, do not perform any surgical procedure on the cancerous abscess that is present in the womb.
Capitol .lxxiii.	 Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	 On the care of hemorrhoids, and tail, and red boils which occur in the vulva of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	 Hemorrhoids are considered to be caused by openings of many veins, from which blood flows continuously; and old hemorrhoids become thorns.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	 And I have already said in the division the species of these and their signs, and now I will say which ones receive treatment and which ones do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	 Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and thorns, when they are in the depth of the womb and do not appear to the senses, then no surgical procedure should be performed on them.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	 And it is necessary that you place the woman in a cold bath and immediately extend her with scissors or with a rough cloth, and incise those [areas] with the razor.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	 Then immediately sprinkle on those [areas] the flow of blood from one of the powder jars without piercing, as is done with hemostatic powders, such as oak galls and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	 Then immediately wrap the feet in linen for an hour, and then place her in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	 And if the bleeding persists, then make that one sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peels and rose petals and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	 Then immediately take barley flour and mix it with honey, vinegar, and water to make a poultice on the back of him/her.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	 And if the blood is drawn out, that's good; and if not, apply two cupping glasses, and to the nipples without scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 Then immediately take wool and soak it in coriander juice or rosemary juice or thyme juice with vinegar and apply it to the area; then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	 Here's my best guess for a translation of the given sentence:
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "And heal that one so that he is made well.
Capitol .lxxiv.	 "Chapter .74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	 "A rupture of the intestines occurred in the mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	 "Many types of swellings occurred in the mother, such as crab (cancer), lupine (lapindent), ulcerous, abscessed (adhubelat), herpetic, fistulous (fistulas emorroyas), gouty (raguarrias), tetter (thyl) and other swellings.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	 "And I have already described these illnesses, their types and their signs, and their cures in the corresponding section.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	 "And I want to say in this treatise on the abscess that appears in the mother when it is one of the healable abscesses, and if you want to know how the operation of it is done with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	 "Therefore, you should consider if the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with throbbing, fever and redness, and if it hurts upon touching it, then do not cut it open with perforation, and heal it with remedies that promote maturation until the acute symptoms subside.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	 "And then you should place the woman on a board that has two handles; and let her lean back on her heels and adjust her feet to be lower than her belly, and let her legs be spread apart, and place her arms below her knees, and bind each one with a suitable bandage.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	 And then the midwife should follow from behind and to the right of the mother, holding the instrument with which she has opened the maternal orifice; its form will be described later in this text.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	 And it is important that when you administer this instrument, you insert the tip into the vagina of the woman, and ensure that only the tip of the instrument enters the mother, guiding the patient gently.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	 However, if the instrument is larger than the tip of the vagina, then you should place cloths over the vaginal opening to prevent any part of the instrument from entering the vagina.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	 And it is necessary that you place the handle of the instrument towards your right, and the person administering the instrument should hold it and turn the handle until the maternal orifice is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	 And when the child appears, and it is touched with the hand and is clean and wet, then you should dry that part of its head with a Latin sponge.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	 And when the mucus is expelled, then you should place a cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil, containing some hemostatic herbs, on the wound; and place a pressure pad at the vaginal opening.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	 And place outside, at the mother's (or midwife's) feet, a clean wool cloth soaked in water in which malva flowers have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	 And it should be treated for about two days with an ointment that you need to apply until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	 And sometimes the mother and the wound are washed together with water and honey until they are healed; then with water in which a root of lily or aristolochia longa has been boiled; and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	 And if the wound is inside the mother's womb, then you should be forbidden from treating it with iron; instead, treat them with water as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	 Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	 To teach midwives how to treat pregnant women when they are sick with a swollen belly, which is not natural.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	 It is necessary that the midwife knows the signs of natural childbirth at the beginning. This means that when you see the woman push with her thighs and desire to smell the air, and she becomes relieved because of what is happening during labor, and hastens the expulsion of the fetus, then know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and it is the delivery of the child head first, and the second part either hanging or dangling from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	 When you see these signs, it is necessary to press the abdomen of the patient so that the baby descends gently; when they descend onto their head, give them a secondary birth, and cleanse those excesses with good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	 But the one who comes out in this manner is not natural and not praiseworthy, because when the baby exits with its feet first and its body before its head, or one hand by the foot, or the head and one hand come out together, or the head comes out before the body, it can easily be turned onto its neck, and the appearance of this is not praiseworthy.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	 It is therefore necessary for the midwife to be wise and discerning in all these matters, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	 And I am showing you every figure of these, and what kind of birth is in them, so that it may be indicated by this and have been noted accordingly.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	 When the baby comes out headfirst by natural effort, and this is violent toward the woman and difficult for her, and sometimes her strength is already weakened, then perform this operation: let the women hold him, and evaporate his head with fenugreek boiled in water and with warm oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	 And then insert the midwife between her thighs with a small spatula and open it with that second one, or scratch it with her nail until the moisture inside it comes out.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	 And press on the woman's belly until she delivers the child.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	 But if it does not come out, then the woman should be anointed with small bird droppings and fenugreek seeds mixed together.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	 And then command her to be pressed and make her sneeze with condiments; and hold her mouth and nose shut for an hour, because the child will soon come out. 😊
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	 And if both hands of the baby have already come out at first, then you should gently push them back in little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	 But if it does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on her knees and raise her feet up, and then suddenly drop the knees to the ground; and have someone hold the woman so she does not fall because of the sudden movement.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	 And if the hands are not turned back inside and the baby dies, then cut them off and pull out the rest of the baby or tie its body to its hand with cloth and pull it out that way, because it will soon come out.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	 From the extraction of the fetus from its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	 When the fetus comes out feet first, it is necessary to pull its legs upwards and then turn the small fetus, and then push it back in, and then take one of its legs and stretch them little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	 But since it has come out into the thighs, then you command the woman to push, and make her cough with conditions, because she will give birth if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	 And if she does not give birth with what we have recommended, then you gradually return the small fetus until you place it according to its natural shape, because in this way it will be born with easier delivery.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	 And if it is still not delivered with all that we have recommended, then take marshmallow and dissolved gum, and pound it well in the mortar, and then anoint the woman's vulva with water, as low as her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	 And then make her sit in lukewarm water until she achieves the hips.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	 And when you see that the parts coming out of her are softened, then do fumigation with myrtle and place it underneath her.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	 And when you have smoked them with sub-fumigation for an hour, then make them sit on a chair, and immediately make them sneeze and expel the smoke from their mouths, and remove it from them, and apply gentle pressure to the lowest part of their abdomen, because this will cause the stool to exit quickly.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	 Immediately evacuate the bowels from between their buttocks and their hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	 When the stool exits in this manner, then you should gradually insert their fingers into them; and immediately the woman should be placed upside down on her head, with her feet hanging down, and those [fingers] should be lying on the bed, and she should hold her hands together.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	 And then gradually apply pressure on the abdomen, and immediately extract what is under the feet of the ears until it reaches the lowest part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	 And if the stool has not been expelled, then take hold of their feet and shake them violently, and immediately apply pressure to what is above the hypochondria little by little until the stool reaches the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	 And then gradually insert their fingers and draw out the stool little by little, and command the woman to press until the stool has been expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	 Based on the context provided and the similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, I will attempt to translate the sentence line by line.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	 Certainly! Let's break down the sentence and translate it line by line:
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	 If he cannot walk, then place him on the bed, and shake his limbs vigorously with a violent shaking, and immediately administer liaments which I have recommended for mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	 If labor has begun, then place her on the birthing stool, and study the delivery of the hand, and guide the baby according to natural shape, and make the woman sneeze and command her to push until she is delivered.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	 The baby is delivered on the back of his hand, with his hands expanded and his face towards his mother's back.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	 Let the midwife take the baby’s hand and then slowly turn him until he is face down.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	 And when he is born and guided, then place on his head what we have recommended of oil and mucilage.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	 Then command her to expel little by little, and when you have done this, then make her sit on a birthing stool and command her to lean over the right side, and then command her to push; and make her sneeze with force.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	 The prepared fetus exits on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	 When they suffer from fear of the mother according to this manner, consider, and then you should cut the foreskin with your fingernail until it is drained of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	 And if the fetus is suspended above the face and neck of the mother, then you should cut the umbilical cord to prevent it from being retained and causing death.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	 And then you should carefully deliver the fetus by parts until you place it in the appropriate position, and instruct the woman to press gently on her abdomen, and the fetus will be expelled with ease, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	 The birth of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	 Know that twins are born from multiple conceptions, and sometimes three or four are born at once, but this is rare and extraordinary; yet there are certain causes in nature that bring this about, and not by chance.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And note that if they are multiplied, each one has a foreskin and is separated by the navel cord of each of them; sometimes they are expelled as if it were a single fetus with an easy natural birth, and sometimes they come out in an incredible manner, as we have mentioned.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	 And if there are difficulties with their childbirth and it leads to what we have said about unnatural figures, then cure those as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	 And if the midwife is skillful and acts with ease and delicacy, and with slowness, and is ingenious according to every figure as it has been prepared by ingenuity leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	 Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and is aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	 Sometimes a mother carries one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, even ten or more formed fetuses, and it has been verified that a woman has aborted six, and another ten, all fully formed. The cause of this was done by the measurement of the glorious wise.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	 And all this should be known by the midwife, for she may quickly perceive the similarity of these things and thus apply herself accordingly.
Capitol .lxxvi.	 Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	 Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	 When you cure the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of the medicine and it is not yet expelled, and you must necessarily use an operation by hand, then it is necessary that you consider if the woman is of sound constitution and is not with any of the accidents through which there may be danger for her.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	 And then you should moisten the patient's mouth with a mixture of olive oil, honey, and fenugreek seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	 And then anoint the midwife's hands with those oils and mixtures, and then gently insert her hand into the patient, and then carefully search with her hand for the location where the nails are lodged in the foot.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	 And in these cases: then consider if the patient's body is prepared for the procedure. Then place the nails in their heels, neck, mouth, palate, under the beard, sternum, or near the ribs and hip areas.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	 But if the nails are descending into their feet, then place them in the soles of the feet or in the middle of the ribcage.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	 And it is necessary that you hold the nails with your right hand and place the curvature of the nail in the space between the thumb and index finger of your left hand. Then gently insert your hand until the nail reaches the desired location.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	 And then place and fix another nail or the third one if necessary, so that it is equally drawn and not extended along its straight path alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	 And it is necessary for the person that there be something soft between them; and if any part of them is retracted, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them gently and turn with those parts that are retracted.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	 Therefore, if the baby's head is forgotten (i.e., not delivered), then move your fingers to a place that is more open; and do this until the entire baby is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	 However, if one hand is pushed forward and it is not possible to reduce it due to the constriction of the baby, then a cloth should be wrapped around that hand; and then carefully extract it until all of it is delivered, and then cut it off at the wrist or elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	 And do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	 However, if the baby's head is large, or there is difficulty in delivery due to its size, or there is water in the head, then it is necessary to insert between the fingers a thin spatula and split the skull and extract the water, or discover that with an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will be found with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter following this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	 And similarly do this if the injury is of great severity by nature: and then it is necessary to incise that with an almagret, or that it takes that with alundas as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	 And if the head is swollen and constricted, you must slit open the throat until the moisture that is in the feet has been released.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	 But if it is not complicated and does not respond to swelling, then you should incise the head as soon as possible, according to what seems best to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	 And if the sides of the abdomen are swollen or in dropsy, then you should puncture it until the moisture that is within it flows out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	 But if the injury is on its feet, then its attraction is light and its direction towards the mother's mouth is also light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	 But if the abdomen and feet are constricted, then you should extract it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and slit open the abdomen and feet until the fluid within them flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	 But if the other members are missing and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, then she should insert her hand into the lower part of the uterus, and with that she should search for the head, and pull it towards herself with the aforementioned until it reaches the mother's mouth, and then she should insert one or two fingers into it, and pull it with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	 And if the mother's mouth is constricted by an abscess that occurs in her, then it is not appropriate to prick it with a lancet. Instead, it is necessary at that time to administer infusions of moist, fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	 And apply plasters; and have the patient drink waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	 And if the abscess is on the side of the head, then if possible, it should be lanced; and the same treatment as mentioned for a living abscess should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	 And if this is not possible, then it should be incised in pieces, and the contents should be extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	 And one must ensure that no cause remains inside the abscess.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	 And once you have completed all your operations, then administer the treatment that we have mentioned for treating abscesses that occur in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	 And if bleeding occurs, then give stiptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	 And I have seen a woman whose womb contained a dead fetus, and upon this there was another fetus adhering, and this other fetus was also dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	 A long time has passed since the mother developed an abscess in her navel; it swelled until it burst open, and she began to push out arms.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	 And I was called to care for him and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	 And then I placed on him some strong-acting plasters for various reasons, and an bone came out of him, and after a few days, another bone came out; and I was very amazed, as there are no bones in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	 And then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	 Therefore I examined the wound and extracted many bones from it, the woman being in her sixth month of pregnancy, and she lived in such a manner for a long time, until a small arm came out of her.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	 And I did not consider this to be strange, but rather because in this there is science and help for the physician who performs manual treatment for healing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	 Of the shapes of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	 The shape of the hook with which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	 This is the shape of the strengthener in which the lips are cut, with two hooks at each end of its two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	 However, this hook should be more subtle and narrower, and it should be made either of ebony or boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	 And let the width of each post be two fingers and the margin of each also two fingers, and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle of two posts there are two adjustments of this same post which are already fixed, whose length is more than half a palm, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	 And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is open with them when you turn the two aforementioned screws.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	 Another form similar to that, but more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	 It is made of ebony or boxwood according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	 However, at its end there are two additions like these, and the length of those additions is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	 And when you want to open the mother with these, then you make the woman lie on her back with her feet hanging off, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	 And then you open your hand with the instrument in the same way as you do with forceps, according to the amount you want of the opening of the mouth of the mother until the midwife does what she wants.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	 "The form of dizziness which the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	 The form of vertigo by which the object is propelled.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	 "The form of dizziness with which the head feels heavy.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	 "And it resembles a pair of tongs with teeth at the extremities, like this, and sometimes it is made long like this pair of tongs according to this form, like this, with teeth like those that cut and press down.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	 "A less common form of dizziness:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	 "The form of a hook with a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	 "The form of a double-hooked spine:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	 "The form of pincers with teeth like a saw, with which the head of the object is pressed down.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	 "The form of a knife with two edges, with which the head is cut off.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	 "The form of two broad knives:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	 "All these instruments are exercised, and the more the species of them are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, the easier it is for their operation and the more beneficial they are to men due to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	 "And do not neglect to prepare these instruments wherever you may be, for the need of them is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	 Based on the context provided and the similarity to medieval medical treatises in Romance languages, "De extraccio de la segondina" likely means:
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	 When the placenta is retained after delivery, you should instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze forcefully, and place your hand firmly over her mouth and nose. If the placenta is expelled by this method, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	 And if not, then you take a sponge and pierce it with a hole, and place in that herbs that burn the mouth of the mother, such as calamus, rue, anise, camomile, Arabic scordium, cassia wood, and santolina.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	 All these herbs or some of them should be soaked in water in the sponge, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	 And then insert a reed into the mother's mouth and hold it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	 And then make her sneeze as we said before, and the placenta will be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	 But if this treatment is still not effective and the placenta has not been expelled, then you should instruct the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or a mixture of althea, and then insert it into the vagina and search for the placenta with her hand. Once she has found it, she should grasp it firmly but gently, and if it is adherent to the uterus, she should insert her hand as we have recommended, and when she finds the placenta, she should extract it little by little, straight out, so that the mother does not suffer from violent contractions.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	 Before it is necessary that the right and left ribs be moved with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	 And then adjust the amount of attraction, for it will obey and avoid adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	 And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with snuffing and with a medicine made from olive oil and herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	 But if it has not been forgotten with all the causes that we have recommended, then be careful not to act on it in repetition of extraction, but rather place what comes out of him into the mother's mouth, and then cauterize that with ointment and tetrafarmacon; for this will make it putrefy and will dissolve and be forgotten after a few days.  (Note: "tetrafarmacon" is likely a medical term that does not have a direct English translation, so I left it in the original language.)
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	 But when it becomes putrid, it is a very bad thing for the head and stomach, and this harms the patient; therefore, appropriate fumigations and remedies should be administered at that time.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	 But some of the ancients have already tried a fumigation made from dried figs and narcissus.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	 Here is a possible translation of your provided sentence into English, maintaining a similar style to the example you gave:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	 "It should be made of glass or iron.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	 "And the thin end should be placed in the cone and the wide end over the fire, and the incense should be placed on the coals of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	 "And keep doing this until that incense is completely burned away and then repeat with another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	 "About the treatment of an infant's unruptured anal fistula.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	 "Many infants are born with their anuses not yet open, which is called a thin and narrow passage.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	 "Then the midwife should open this passage with her finger; if not, she should open it with a sharp spoon, and make sure not to touch the sphincter.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	 "And then place wool soaked in oil and wine on it, and treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	 "But if you fear that it may become narrow again, then place a catheter in the opening for many days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	 "And if narrowing of the anus occurs due to the healing of a wound or abscess, then that healing must be cut open, and then it should be treated with the water we have mentioned for treating wounds and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	 It seems like you're trying to translate a medieval medical text. Here's my attempt at translating the given line:
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	 This is a challenging text due to the archaic language and potential regional dialects, but I'll give it my best attempt at translation:
E es una fistula o motas.	 "And it is a fistula or hemorrhoids.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	 "And when that swelling is old and exudes white, watery humidity or subtle pus, sometimes some of these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	 "And those penetrations are known by what comes out of them in the form of discharge and flatulence; and sometimes the patient uses these openings for discharge, and it is easy for worms to come out of them.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	 "And sometimes some of these fistulas penetrate into the bladder and into the opening of the penis; and sometimes they penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the groin.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	 "And this is how a penetrating fistula in the rectum that does not penetrate is recognized: you insert your finger into the anus, and when it is not too painful, introduce a thin probe of iron or lead into the fistula.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	 "But if there is pain in that area, then introduce a thin probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	 "And if you do not feel that at all and there is no discharge of any kind, neither worms nor flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then proceed to the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	 Based on the provided text and similarity to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, I'll translate the sentence line by line:
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	 Based on the context and similarity to other Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	 And in all those fistulas that penetrate, there is no complete cure, and the cure for them is labor and futility of foolish doctors upon which they insist.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	 But in the one that does not penetrate and is not ancient, healing with iron is hoped for, as I will tell you, and this which I have already proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	 And have the patient lie between your hands upon their back and lift their legs up into your arms, the cushions should be inclined towards their belly, and then gently introduce a probe of lead or iron if it is in the fistula opening, until you know the place where the probe passes through.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	 And if that part of the patient is around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger therein at that place.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if you feel the probe in your finger already penetrating by itself, or if you feel between your finger and that part some flesh or skin, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on it, for there is no cure in it, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	 But nevertheless, some say that it heals in some men late.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	 And the treatment by which healing is hoped for in him is that you heat up a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before, and introduce that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those fleshy parts of the fistula are tightened and resemble a quill of a bird's feather.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	 And then care for that [patient] with bandages wrapped in linen until all those attached tissues are healed, and then care for them with medicines to heal and strengthen the flesh, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, then it cannot be cured at any time by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	 If the thread enters [the body] and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the thread there is a slight thickness of flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula appears on the surface of the coccyx, then dry the coccyx from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see if it dries with the thread, and let it be in the fistula until the desiccation reaches the place where the end of the thread comes out, and through the thread it is liberated and cut off.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	 And then clean those fistulated tissues which resemble the quill of a feather, and let none of them remain for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	 But if there is a flow of blood when you operate on those tissues, then it is good to cauterize with fire or a sharp instrument, because cauterizing with fire has two good effects: it adheres the tissues together and dries up the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	 And immediately care for that with cloths wrapped in wool or in clean fabric until the place gets warm, and then treat the wound with ointments made from hardened meat, which stimulate growth and healing.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	 And so are the medicines that have astringent and drying properties; when restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	 But if the fistula has already penetrated into the buttocks and is extended to the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it with that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	 And thus if you find a band or membrane of fat or flesh between you and it, and it is close to the opening, then do not operate on it directly but rather through faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	 Therefore, treatment should be administered in one of three ways: either by cauterizing it as we have said; or by drying it out until you can reach the cavity and insert the necessary instruments for proper care; but do not proceed too much with drying to avoid cutting into the intestine, which could lead to an accidental release of feces on the part of the patient without their consent. And then treat that area with water as we have said, because it will heal quickly; or extend and clean out that membrane, and dry it out near the anus, either with a probe or another sharp instrument, and then cleanse the fistulized flesh in the dried section to the best of your ability with dressing. And then strive to completely heal the wound with drying, and if the pus-filled opening is not healed and the fistula remains open near the anus, it will be easier for the patient to pass stool.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	 And sometimes the fistula ends in this manner: it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it emerges from the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the cord and on the margin of the anus. Then take a perforated tip probe, which is like a needle used for preparing hearts in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	 And insert it into that fidel, wrapped in five threads or around those; and then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	 However, if it penetrates into the margin of the anus deeply inside, then you extract the thread from that hole in such a way that you insert your finger into the anus; and you pull out the end of the thread and join the two ends together, and tighten each one, and leave it like this for a day or two. And when the thread is more incised into the flesh, tighten well until those fleshes between the two ends of the thread are incised and come together.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	 Then care for the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	 However, if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate by any method you are prepared for, so that it is very thin, because it is not your task to do this in order not to incise the skin; and then proceed with that until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	 The form of the spiny spatula with which the fistula is pierced: the tip of which is very sharp and the other end is not sharp, so that you do not introduce anything unnecessary, as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	 Of stitches for hemorrhoids in which blood runs during the insertion of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	 Hemorrhoids are of two types: either they appear in the rectum like small lumps of coal, or they may be like a bunch of grapes.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	 And these can be small or large, and blood may constantly run from them, appearing as one or many, and they may protrude from the anus, and appear at the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	 However, those that protrude from the anus are generally of less liquidity, from which runs citron-colored water or a little blood with clots continuously, and they appear according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	 And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit and press until the anus protrudes and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	 Then you cut and suspend with scissors what you have grasped with your nail, and then you should cut them off at their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	 This text seems to describe a medical procedure for treating an unspecified condition affecting the nails. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 And then treat those with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	 And if the feces do not obey evacuation, then give the patient an enema with a small nozzle, and wash them with the water that is in the colon, so that it obeys evacuation lightly when the patient is pressed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	 But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is light, and it is that you should take them with your finger or with a hook, and squeeze them, and then treat them with the water we mentioned until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	 And for those that you have squeezed, it is necessary to administer sutures in this way: take a thread wrapped around and insert it into a needle, and then extract the hemorrhoids from the divided parts above, and make the thread penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the part below the needle, and tie them tightly; and bind the hemorrhoid with strong strength, and then cut the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	 Do this to all [hemorrhoids], and leave one of them open, so that the excess blood can flow from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	 Based on the context and similarities with other Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 E aproximadamente deja entrar el líquido; y cuando se haya vaciado, trata la herida con ungüentos u otro tratamiento hasta que esté curada.
De curacio de fistulas.	 E apropo layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	 This sentence is discussing a medical condition where certain bodily functions or processes have been disrupted due to either excessive dryness (exseccacio) or constriction by natural forces (costriccio de natura). Here's the translation:
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	 And since they are old and not valuable in that medicine, then it is necessary for you to scrape them with the point of a spatula or with your nail until they become moist, and place the skin of those [pus] on top; and prohibit those from healing; and then care for them until they heal.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	 And then you remove them with intense pus until they begin to bleed and become raw; and then care for them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	 For the cure of leprosy, this is the key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	 Know that leprosy is the key, and it is not unless the night is red according to the color of the body similar to a clove head, and it appears throughout the body, especially in the parts below the feet and at the fingers, and through these pains you must treat them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	 And then it is necessary that it be cut out what is in the circle of the nail, and held with tweezers or pincers, and eradicated from its root; and then care for that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	 And if you wish, cauterize it according to what has been said in the previous chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	 But a wart is a small, rough, round excrescence on the surface of the body, and they are often seen in children more than adults.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	 And the treatment for this is to extend and compress it, or tighten it with a bandage or with leather that is not too tight.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	 And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	 And already the inverse and non-inverse have been eradicated using the instrument that I will describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	 But a formica is a small elevated or large fistula on the surface of the body, and when the cold reaches it, it is felt like a formica bite, and it occurs around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	 The treatment for this is to take a hollow pen made of goose feather or vulture feather, and it should be strong. Place the canula over the formica until it contains the circle of the canula from its edges; then rotate your hand with the canula until you compress what is around the formica, and place it on the flesh, and thus eradicate the formica from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	 And if you wish, do this with an iron or iron needle in this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	 Let the tip of the needle be fine and blunt (that is, not piercing) and wrapped in such a way that the touch of it on the finger should be gentle and the rotation of it should be slow.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	 And if you want to cauterize a fly [or an insect], do so according to what was previously said in the chapter on cauterization of insects.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	 Regarding the forms of instruments used for treatment.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	 Sometimes cauterization is done with silver, or lead, or melted or hammered iron; and sometimes these instruments are made small or large according to those for whom they are used, because that which is used in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are freckled or painful, their cauterizations should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	 The shape of large and few [cautery irons]:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	 The end of the tube on which the bag is tied should be wide in this manner; and there should be a distinction where the bag is tied, as seen here.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	 And the lower end of the tube, which is inserted into the rectum, should be blunt (i.e., not open) like a lion, beyond subtility; and on one side of it there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should correspond to the thickness of the rays and slightly larger.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	 And let there be a bag in which are placed the medications of animal bladder or sheepskin, and its size should be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	 And let it be punctured with sharp needles in such a way as it is turned; and if the space that is between the needles is the thickness of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	 Then insert strongly the crude bile into those needles, which should be from the same needles or envelop them; and fasten with it the bag; and when the bag is placed on it, tightly seal its opening between two distinct parts with strong constriction, and then sterilize each needle with it: However, the method of sterilizing with it is that you fill the bag with the medication, which should be warmed according to the patient's tolerance level; and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	 Then let the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs high and place a stool or something similar underneath them; then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; then insert it into the rectum gently, then the attendant should take the bag and squeeze it with both hands until all its contents are expelled into the intestine; then remove the cautery and let the patient raise their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	 And if the medicine causes that person to vomit, let it be so as much as possible; and if he sleeps with that for a whole night, it is better for healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	 And if you treat that person for abdominal pain and his vomiting ceases, then you should continue using the cautery until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	 And if there are hemorrhoids or painful swellings in the anus, then let it be gently and delicately cauterized, as infants are treated with cautery.
De curacio de las plaguas.	 On treating wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	 I have already said in the division of wound treatment what is appropriate for this book, and now I say that their treatment with the hand and with medicines should be complete.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	 Therefore, I say that wounds are classified according to how they were made and the place where they occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	 And the causes by which many times wounds are made are also like these: discharge of stone, cutting with a knife or sword, striking with a spear or club, arrow, or similar to those from many other causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	 But the wounds that are in the places of the body are such as: a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the chest, and similar to those in the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	 And I am recommending the treatment of some diseases, so that you may apply this reasoning and rule to other diseases as well.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	 And I will begin with simple head ailments, for the memory of composite ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	 Therefore, I say that when a simple head wound occurs and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is caused by the impact of a stone or something similar, and the cord has already been severed only slightly and the wound is large and you fear the formation of an abscess on that patient, then be cautious and perform a trepanation of the cephalic vein immediately; do not delay this; and extract from him as much blood as the strength of the patient allows, unless there is some other cause prohibiting trepanation, especially if the blood that has come out of the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	 And let the trepanation be on the opposite side of the wounded part; and keep the patient from stuffing, heavy food, and coarse meals.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	 But if any cause prevents him from having a light meal, then let it be reduced to food and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	 And place on the wound, if an abscess is forming on it, a piece of linen soaked in rose oil or in wine that has been made astringent.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	 "But if it is certain that there is an abscess, then place a poultice on the wound. If it is recent, use its own blood and unchanged air, and add to it a little of the powder I will mention shortly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	 "And if the air has already changed it, then place on some salves until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	 "But if the wound is large or deep and has an irregular shape, and its edges are not closely approximated by nature, then approximate those edges with stitches as I will describe to you about the method of stitching.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	 "But if the wound is exposed to the bone and sinew, and there is no retention but only a small suspension, then incise it and treat the wound with medicines, and restore the flesh in its place as best you can, and instruct the patient to eat foods that are oily: heads and poultry of a similar kind, until it heals.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	 "And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all that is rotten and remove it, and treat it accordingly.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	 "But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow, and it has not been divided by medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find that it is not cut, then cut it with a spatula, or tie it off; and if necessity compels you to do what we have said you cannot do, then cauterize until the blood is divided.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	 And if these sores are simple and small, then their cause is light; thus, you should sprinkle this powder over them because it hardens before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	 And the method for the powder is this: take one part olive oil, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts of fresh wax; let all be well sifted and sieved, and with it fill the sore, and press it down tightly until it sticks well to it and coagulates with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	 Then strengthen it above with a bandage and leave it alone, and do not remove it until it is healed, because the medicine has not been taken from it until it is cured.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	 And sometimes this alone helps, when you do not have olive oil and dragon's blood at hand.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	 And also perform this same operation on large wounds when it is necessary to cover them and bind them tightly, and these fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	 And if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then this powder is not suitable for that purpose. But then treat them with the water we mentioned earlier, so that you place over them some thick unguents, or sprinkle over them powdered barley flour mixed with water and honey until they crust over; and then treat them with the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	 But if you encounter a small bone fracture with the injury, then extract it using tweezers.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	 And I will explain the treatment for skull fractures as follows:
De las plaguas del col.	 For injuries to the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	 But if the injury occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment from a simple head injury.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	 But if the nerves or arteries of the neck have been cut, then if it is the nerve, there is no remedy for it except to avoid any treatment that causes vigorous constriction, such as applying ziniar and zegi which are vitriol and similar substances, because they harm the nerves and contract them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	 And do not place anything on the wound that causes heat, because the substance of the nerves is cold and its continuation is with the brain, which is the most important of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	 And if it is treated with light medicines, such as being washed with sweet water, sometimes infused with rose oil or non-rose oil, and poulticed when washed with sweet water and the other stones diminishing according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	 If the wound is large, then administer stitches, or sew up its lips, and then treat it with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	 But if the wound is deep or if pus has collected in its lowest part, then pierce it in the most depressed place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	 But if an artery has been cut in the wound and blood is flowing, then separate or dry it up, or bind it tightly, or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	 But if the gullet has been cut or completely severed and the neck veins are saved, then you should stitch the lips of the wound along the length of the throat and do not touch it; before that, equalize it and return it to its natural shape, and then strengthen it with a suitable bandage, and leave it for some days; and then treat it with ointments that contain hemostatic and stimulant properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	 But if the wound has penetrated to the bone and splintered it, then you should percuss it, and if there are fragments of bone in the wound, extract all that you can; and what is not apparent to you, leave it until the wound putrefies, and the foreign body separates, and the pain of it is relieved.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	 And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	 And if in the wound a fistula is formed, then cure it with water, of which the recipe will be found shortly in its respective chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	 Of wounds of the neck or similar, when they are made between the shoulders and are made with a sword or a dagger or a lance or similarly.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	 If it is a piercing by lance or dagger and you see blood coming out of it, then consider whether there is any air escaping when the patient exhales; if so, know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	 And if there is not much depth and the wound is recent with its blood, then in the first hour you should sprinkle on it powder so that the blood does not remain at the bottom of the wound and return to the heart and kill the patient; instead, put on it an attractive ointment, and do this twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	 And if the ointment is not at hand, then place on the opening of the wound cotton soaked in water from the dew; and make sure that the patient sleeps on the wound so that the moisture in it flows out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	 Here is a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	 If the wound is due to a cut from a sword or knife and it's simple on the surface of the foot or back, then cure that with water preceding stitching if it's large, or with powder if it's small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	 But if the cut has reached the bone and heavy pieces have fallen off it, then you turn the wound to extract those pieces if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	 But if they are not separate, then leave them inside so that the wound may heal, as their removal is difficult.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	 And for other wounds occurring in other members, the same treatment in care is the same treatment that we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	 Of the wounds of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	 The disorder which occurs in the belly is either great, small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	 In the case of a large wound, sometimes the intestine or its nerves are cut, so it is more necessary and appropriate to stitch them together. 
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	 A small wound is difficult to treat in any other way, and you know that their reduction is more difficult if you do not pay attention to the introduction of them into their place immediately, because it swells and thickens, making its treatment difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	 "And therefore the best incision is the middle one, because with that one it is not difficult to return the intestine, unlike the two previously mentioned types.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	 "And know that the closure of the belly is done in four ways, but two closures are common and appropriate for the closures of other diseases of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	 "And the other two closures are more specific to other diseases, but nevertheless they are most specific for the closure of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	 "And I will recount to you each one with an explanation and description.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	 "Therefore, I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause for the intestine through it, and it is difficult to return it, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the incision as we have said, or when the intestine has swollen due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	 "And therefore when it is so, then you should scrape that place until you can insert a sponge or cloth dampened only in lukewarm water, or boil it with vinegar, cumin, pepper, and cloves in order for the swelling to be resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	 And sometimes this is done with a substance that has astringent properties, and it is better than water alone in reducing the swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	 And when you see the swelling has been reduced, then you should moisten the intestine with water in which althea and mallow have been steeped, because by this means it is relieved of its inflammation with little pain.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	 But if the intestine of the patient has been removed, then perform this treatment: cut the opening a little with an instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	 And the primary treatment is better when it is performed so that there is no cutting, and there is no need for drying and weakness.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	 Concerning the instrument, see its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	 One part of it is twisted and sharp, while the other part is not sharp. The tip should be fine but not as fine as a needle; instead, it should be somewhat blunt at the end.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	 And so when the wound is enlarged and the intestine protrudes, then its reduction should be according to its natural shape in its proper place, if possible on this [water]. For it is better that way.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	 But when the opening is large and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place the patient's head and feet higher than their middle.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	 And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always place your attention and consideration on it so that the part where the wound is located is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	 And thus you must administer this to both large wounds and smaller ones.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	 And in the case of small wounds, place what you have prepared on them, and then ensure that the one administering it is between your hands, with the entire wound held by their hand and the lips of the wound sealed, so that there is no cause for another suture.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	 And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or count the needles according to the width of the wound; then pass through the edge of the disruption on the little finger, and pull the thread taut, ensuring that you do not sew both ends of the string with two ends of the needle, but rather leave the end of the thread outside between the parts within, until you make that penetrate into that part; and having added two ends of the thread and two ends of the needle, you have made four stitches.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	 Certainly! Let's break down the text and translate it line by line:
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	 And the needles should be moderate between thickness and fineness because fine needles lightly cut into the flesh; thick ones are difficult to insert into the vein, so they should be moderate in both fineness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	 It is not necessary that the needle be placed at both ends of the vein too close, so that the flesh is not lightly cut and the wound opens before it heals.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	 And do not extend the stitches, so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	 Then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not irritate the patient during their sleep; and you will place on the stitch powdered dust expanded from every side, which has the ends of the needles; and leave those until you know that the wound has already healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	 And this kind of stitching with needles is most suitable for small wounds, because only one or two needles are used in their stitching.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	 But the second kind of stitch is common: it is that you join together with a stitch the four ends, of the vein and the two ends of the skin, in one go, with a needle on which thread is wrapped equally in fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	 Based on the context and the words used in the sentence, here's a line-by-line translation:
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	 And place between each stitch the amount equal to the thickness of the smallest finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	 And this stitch is known as a "whipstitch".
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	 And with this stitch I sutured the wound which was inflicted on a man's belly, and he had been wounded with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was greater than one palm, and it protruded from the intestines around two palms from the middle of the intestine, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that after the intestine had been out of the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	 And the wound was healed within fifteen days or thereabouts, and I cared for him and he recovered; and after that he lived for many years, and led an active life.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	 And the other doctors had judged that he would not recover; and it was a miracle, for I did not treat him with ointment, because it was in a place where ointment or any medicine could not be found, but I placed cotton over the wound twice a day and washed it frequently with honey water until he recovered.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	 But I will describe two types of stitches according to the account of Paulus (Aegineta).
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	 And it is that you should begin with the suturing of the tendon, and insert the needle from the outside to the inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	 And then, with the needle penetrating the tendon and the ligament according to its length and straightness throughout the entire body, leave the end of the thread at which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from inside to outside in the other end of the middle.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	 And then when you have done that penetration, you should do it again in the same end of the middle from outside to inside; and leave the thread's end that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end from inside to outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	 And make that penetration with the same thread you used to suture, and ensure that all of it penetrates into the end of the middle that is on his inside.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	 And then begin from this same side and sew it with that end which is on the other side of the thread, and extract the needle from the tendon which you have penetrated, and then return that to the tendon and sew the end of the thread which is on the other side with this end of the middle; and extract that from the tendon which is on his part.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	 And do this one time and another, and do this one time close to another until you sew everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	 And the summary of this method of suturing is that you sew with leather thread, with which you sew the hairs, so that you sew one end of the thread from the part near the tail and leave the other end until it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	 But the second type of suture, which they call likewise Gualia, and about this one he speaks and recommends it, is that you sew that according to symmetry with which some doctors sew it, so that all its divided parts are joined together in their corresponding part by nature; and apply the end of one to the other end of it, and this is done as I recommend to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	 Be sure to insert the needle into the end of the thread at your fingertip, then make it penetrate that part from outside to inside in one stroke, and leave two ends of the thread; then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two strokes.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	 And then you should turn each of these [parts], and make each one penetrate from the inside to the outside in two opposite directions, except for those that are on the contrary side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	 And this manner of stitching is better than common slight stitching, and it is the stitching about which a previous mention was made.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	 This is the text from Gaul
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	 And some may say to you, "The stitching of the abdomen is done with two needles." So it is that you insert into these [needles] a thread on each one. Begin with the insertion of the needle where you should, and make it penetrate through to the other side according to the stitching method used for those who have had their hearts removed equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	 And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, then its stitching is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	 But the judgment of treatment for a wound is the same as for other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	 The reason is that when you find the wound recent with its own blood before the air has affected it, and you have reduced the intestine and closed it, then place on it powder for flesh formation.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	 And if the air has already altered the wound, then place on that sore ointments which are at your disposal until they form a hard scab and close the wounds; they should be ciphas and mirated; and then treat it in this manner as with other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	 But if you do not have the medicines at hand, then apply to it immediately, as it begins to ooze pus and blood, and change that twice a day as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you should not need any other medicine in most cases when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	 But if you fear that the wound may spread and affect the main limbs, then it is necessary for you to dip wool in oil of good quality, or in rosemary oil, and place it around the circumference of the areas that are between the joints and under the armpits.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	 And if there is pain or putrefaction in his intestines, for many times this happens, then cauterize it with black stiptic beets, and especially if the putrefaction has penetrated into the intestine and has made a perforating exit into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	 And know that which is of the large intestine is of lighter healing than that which is in the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	 And it is difficult to heal because the intestine that is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from any wound that falls on it; and this is due to the large number of veins in it and the size of those veins, and the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	 But if what proceeds from the wound is the intestine, and you manage to get it fresh, reduce it according to your skill in the same way you reduce the intestines likewise.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	 But if it has passed into the space and has already turned green or black, then you should strengthen that with oil on the spot that is darkened by it, so that blood flow may come, for in the intestine there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	 And then insert that which is another ligament, and place the two ends of the oil hanging from the side of the wound outside it, so that on you may be alleviated the attraction of the intestine and the emission of the arm of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	 Based on the pattern you've provided, here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	 When a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it may be possible to restore it in some men, for this reason: I have seen a person who was wounded in his belly with the blow of a lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach. The wound had become old and formed a fistula, from which excrement and gas were issuing.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	 Then I proceeded with the healing of him, even though he was not fully cured, but I followed that method to ensure that it was healed and the place became consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	 And I told the patient that he could resume his normal activities after the injury to his belly; and no one was afflicted by this misfortune or experienced any complications in their habits of eating and drinking, and then he entered a bath and followed my instructions.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	 And some experienced ones said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it should be tied in this manner: and it is that you take maggots with large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those maggots on the two lips of the wound so that when it bites onto them it strengthens its mouth and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	 And then place another ant near the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants one after another according to the quantity of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	 And then reduce the swelling and close the wound; let those attached heads remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	 And it is possible to tie the intestine with a thin thread made from the animal's intestine attached to it, since it is more in need of a needle; and this means that you take the end of these intestinal threads, and it should be very thin, and then tie the end of it with thread around it, enveloped, and then insert that thread with needles and close the intestine with that, and reduce it in the rupture.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	 And this method of suturing with ants is nothing but a way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	 But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, for then there is no remedy but to remove it, and it will not heal completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	 Of the treatment of hemorrhoids and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	 Certainly! Let's translate the sentence line by line:
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	 Sure, here is the line-by-line translation into English:
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	 And in some men, it is moist, which causes the arm to swell; and very quickly, the moisture is absorbed within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	 And sometimes this moisture is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	 And I have already said in the division, when I spoke of diseases, that every ulcer that is not healed and has no naked flesh is not so only for one of these nine causes: either because there is a lack of blood in the body; or because the ulcer itself is bad; or because between it and the lips there is hard flesh preventing the natural growth of flesh; or because it is caused by excessive heat; or because that ulcer itself is poisonous and the material applied to it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used in its treatment is unsuitable; or when corruption and pestilence occur in the region; or because of the nature of the region, such as in Zaragoza, where the digestion of diseases is difficult and their natural healing is slow; or because there is a bone, or several bones, within it.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	 I have already shown all those causes, their signs and how to treat them with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	 And it is necessary that I teach you the treatment of a fistula, which is caused by an operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	 And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for there are those which reach the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the bladder, or the intestines, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the compound joints made by composition such as that of the hand and foot; and there are those which are close to the main member and resemble it.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	 Therefore, of these fistulas, that which is according to this manner is one of the difficult-to-cure illnesses, and it does not accept treatment, and dealing with it is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	 And if there is any of the fistulas whose depth does not reach these places that have been mentioned, and you wait for and hope in its treatment, and you wish to reach knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight, seek it with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	 But if the fistula is twisted, then seek it with a thin lead probe, for lead, due to the lightness of its body, bends and follows the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	 And if the fistula has horrible words (i.e., is causing severe pain), it is not possible for you to understand or comprehend them by attempting to communicate with the patient.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	 Therefore, irrigate the orifices with syrups, for the moisture used to irrigate them will disperse the other orifices and flow out of them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	 And then inquire carefully according to whatever method is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the cavity of the fistula is distant or near, or if it is a fistula with terrible words and all this is within your power, along with your understanding and skill in treating the patient, and discovering the cause of the pain you should apply pressure with your hand over the area, similar to the signs and symptoms associated with the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	 And when you have considered all these causes with certainty, then proceed to the treatment with confidence: and it is that you should consider whether the fistula is apparent and near, or in a safe place, distant from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the places I mentioned to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Then you should dry out the fistula according to what was said earlier about its appearance, and remove whatever is in that discharge, including corrupted flesh, anything born from the orifices of the flesh, as well as pus and similar matter, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	 Here's my translation of the provided sentence:
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	 And do this with some vinegar, until the sharp medicine dissolves all that is soft in the cavity of the fistula of the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	 And then restore it with ointments that promote healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	 But if it does not heal in this way, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	 But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of it, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, unless there is any obstacle such as a vein, nerve, or main member, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	 But if the bone is exposed and there is any corruption or blackness in it, then you should scrape it until all the corruption is removed; and then cure it with water that causes flesh to grow until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	 And if it does not heal and continues to discharge as before, then know that you have not reached the total eradication of the corruption; therefore, discover it again with great care and make a thorough scraping and cleansing of it with the strongest vinegar you have, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	 E therefore if it is healed, it is good; and if not, then know that this corruption is in the deepest part of the body, which has not been reached, and thus in that case, you should only leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	 And if the bone is slightly corrupted, and it is possible for you to extract it, then use fine forceps suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	 And if there are many bones, then carefully extract all of them, and leave none behind with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	 But if any moisture causes resistance, and you have no fear or doubt in your incision, then cut those ligaments or flesh that may be here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	 But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at that time, then place something over the wound to soften it, and leave it until the flesh and ligaments around those bones have dissolved, and ensure that the wound does not close or become constricted in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	 Finally, if you are afraid, place a cloth soaked in oil or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or any of the other ointments on it. For when those ligaments have rotted and the bones are separated from them by absorption, and the attraction to them is relieved.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	 Here's the translation for the given text:
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	 Sure, let's translate this line by line:
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	 And I recommend that you find something similar in a man's thigh, to use as an example and aid in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	 And there was a young man about thirty years old who suffered pain in his thigh due to an internal abscess that had traveled from the inside of the body until it reached the thigh, and this abscess was very large and had not been caused by any external factor.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	 And so the time passed with him because of the doctors' mistake until the abscess burst, and various materials came out of it. His treatment was then stopped until his thigh was fistulated (punctured), and in him there were many orifices that all exuded pus and the humors of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	 And then many doctors treated him for about two years, but none of them knew more than the art itself, until I was called in.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	 And I saw his thigh and the materials that were coming out of those orifices in great quantities; and already that man's body was totally yellowed and his color was citrinous (yellowish-green).
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	 And then I inserted a probe into one of those orifices, and the probe reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	 And immediately I examined all the openings and found that they originated from every part of the thigh.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	 And then I cut and incised one of the openings which I entered, discovering a piece of bone, and found it to be corrupt, already rotten and putrid; and I discovered that a part of the thigh was also corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	 And then I removed what had been revealed and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	 And I thought that it was not in the bone but rather the corruption which I cut away and removed, and I had already shaved it off.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	 And then I applied healing ointments to the wound for a long time, but it did not heal.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	 And then I probed and discovered again on the bone according to my first discovery, and found continuous corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	 And I removed what appeared to me of that corruption, and then I was determined to perform the treatment and restoration of it, but it did not heal.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	 And then I exposed it again and did not stop incising the bone little by little specifically, and I persisted in the restoration of it, but it did not heal until I had incised around a palm's width of it, and that I extracted with its marrow, and then I restored that with medicines, and it healed lightly and was cured.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	 Certainly! Let's translate the provided sentence into English line by line:
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	 And so it is healed by complete healing, and there is nothing hard like bone in that place; and the condition of his body has been improved, and his strength has returned to him; and he can move around without any difficulty or harm in any way.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	 And if there is a bone protruding in the affected area, then you should proceed as follows: take a ligature and tie it firmly around the end of that protruding bone; have someone extend that part; then place a thicker wool ligature over the first one; next, tie it to the flesh below the bone, extending the end so that you can pull the skin apart; and expose the flesh in the area where you want to cut, so that the saw does not cut into the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	 And place a stick or board beneath the bone properly, because when you do this, it is not permitted that the saw cuts into the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	 And it is necessary that the sawing be done little by little in the rotten place, because if it is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear to the touch, it will require another sawing.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	 The text appears to be discussing the treatment of infected or broken bones. Here is a line-by-line translation:
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	 And let the stitch be according to the location of the corruption, a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	 And if the corruption is in the joint, cut the corrupted joint and saw the bone where it continues with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	 And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in him by reason but by chance.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	 And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is very difficult; however, you must find out in what manner the corruption appears to you, and scrape it away, and cleanse it according to whatever condition is possible for you, and with each instrument let it be rectified to your satisfaction, when no vein or nerve resists you.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	 And know that the knives and saws for cutting these bones are varied according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore it is necessary that you prepare for every kind of operation an instrument suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	 And understand that this operation requires of you knowledge of the type of instrument you will need; for with you is great study and experience in the methods of this art, and familiarity with the types of illnesses, because then you will know what is appropriate for each instrument for every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	 And I will guide you at the end of this chapter on the number of instruments that you will use as simple tools with which you will proceed to your treatment, which you will test on others.
Forma de serra:	 Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	 Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	 Form of another saw
Forma de autra serra gran:	 Shape of a large saw
Forma de ray:	 Shape of a ray
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	 Let the head of this ray be according to the shape of a star-shaped key, and its points should be in the form of alsteel points.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	 And it is not suitable unless with that they are rubbed against the heads of the joints when they are damaged or if the opening is very large.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	 Shape of a larger razor than the others
Forma de razori menor:	 Shape of a smaller razor
Forma de razori lat:	 Shape of a flat razor │
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	 Shape of another decently made saw: let it be made with a higher arch and the sharpness of iron on the blade, and the handle made from a well-shaped wooden stick.
Forma de lu:	 Its shape
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	 Shape of a razor that has a concavity
Forma de razori autra subtil:	 Shape of another subtle razor
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	 Shape of another razor with a curved tip
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	 "A small form of razor resembling a needle.
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	 "Form of an instrument with which bones are cut or dissected:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	 "Form of another, smaller instrument.
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	 "Form of yet another instrument; this one resembles a saw, and its tip is like a saw blade. It is used in many places on the bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	 "Form of a saw suitable for cutting through the bones.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	 "And its tip is triangular and pointed.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	 "And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly, all the instruments that we have mentioned, including razors, cutting tools, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	 "For incising and sawing the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	 "The ends can be cut off either due to internal causes or external ones: either because you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the treatment does not work, or sometimes the corruption spreads to a limb which has no apparent cause, in such cases you must incise that limb up to where the corruption has reached, so that the patient can evacuate through that route any poisonous or malignant substance that might be causing greater damage to the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	 The translation of the given sentence is:
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	 And similarly, if the cause is due to the corruption by some poisonous strikes, such as from a sea scorpion or viper or asp and similar creatures.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	 And if the corruption or strike is in the extremity of the finger, then you should cut off the finger and not give space for the corruption to enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	 And similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you should cut off that part from the base of the thumb, and do not give space for the corruption to enter into the upper arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	 And if it goes up further, then cut off the arm at the elbow joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	 And if the corruption passes and surrounds the elbow, then that is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause for cure at that point requires a great deal of skill.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	 And similarly, with the foot, if corruption reaches the toe of the foot, then you should cut it off at one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	 And if it affects the sole of the foot, then you should cut off the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	 But if it goes up into the shin, then you should cut off the leg at the knee joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	 And if the corruption has already spread over the entire body, then there is nothing else to do but let go of the patient and leave them to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	 And the method of cutting or tying off the limb is to have one ligature above the part you wish to cut, and another ligature on the part below; then the assistant extends a ligature below, and the other assistant extends another ligature above; and you separate the flesh that is between the two ligatures until there is enough space for all the flesh to be exposed; and then it is either cut or tied off.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	 And it should be ensured that cloths of linen are placed on all parts so that they do not touch the clean area, and that the wound is tightly dressed and the pus is cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	 But if blood flows when you operate, then you should cauterize the area gently, or place some hemostatic powders on it; and then return to your procedure until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then bind the afflicted limb with a ligature at the appropriate place, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	 And I remind you of what happened to a man in his foot, this very accident that I and you have discussed, which is because he experienced darkness in his foot due to a burn that resembled the burning of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	 "And that corruption occurs first in the joint of the big toe until it affects the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	 "And then that man prepared himself to inject pus into the area where he saw the pain and swelling most severe, and he made an incision into the foot at the joint, and it was cured.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	 "For a long time, that same corruption occurred in the joint of his index finger.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	 "And then it happened to me, and I decided to puncture that excess with water from the hand of medicines, near the cleansing of his body; and the excess was not punctured and began to spread to another finger on his hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	 "And he asked me to cut open his hand, and I did not want to do so, hoping for the release of that excess, and moreover, I feared that the cutting of his hand would cause death, because the strength of the patient was failing.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	 "And after he despaired of me, he returned to his land and it was reported to me that the man prepared himself and cut open his entire hand, and he was cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	 "And I have not told this story except to be of help concerning this disease, and that it may serve as a sign by which it may be recognized and according to which it may be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	 "On the care of the veins and the quality of enemas with medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	 "When an abscess occurs in fleshy members and the space of the abscess is extended until it forms a collection of pus, and then it breaks open and perforates, and the pus exits from it, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it is also like a thin cloth, and it has not reached final corruption, and does not impress on the bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a vein, and not a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	 "However, if the space is extended until corruption touches any member, then it is called a fistula and not a vein.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	 "And the care of it is that you should cut away all that skin completely as it is rolled up, especially when it is thin and made like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	 "However, if you hope that the skin will adhere and that corruption has not reached its final consequence, and in the skin there is still flesh, then you should treat it with an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	 "And consider the vein, and if it is large and its odor is of fetid smell, then enema that one with Egyptian medication which is made of oil and vinegar and cumin seeds, each in equal parts, placed in a vessel, and heated over the fire until the medicine becomes warm and reaches the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	 And then you take from the patient what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and administer an enema with that mixture, and strengthen the patient's openings, and leave the medicine in for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	 And then extract it with a spatula; and do this for so many days until the intestine is cleansed and the stench has dissipated.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	 And sometimes it is enemaed with ashes water when this medicine is not available to you; and it should be that you take the ash of grape vines, and put them in water; and then strain that mixture and administer the enema until you are sure that the intestine has been cleansed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	 And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ashes water, then enema them with water and honey, and let it be well mixed, crushed cumin, and enema them with wine and honey mixed together, because of the property of honey is that it cleanses and washes, and the wine makes the intestine adhere, and especially when in the wine there is an excess of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	 And when you do this several times and are sure that the intestine has been sufficiently cleansed, then enema them with a solution that promotes flesh growth in them.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	 It appears that the text is written in a medieval form of Occitan, a Romance language historically spoken in southern France. Here's my line-by-line translation into English:
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	 And if the opening of the cavity is narrow and does not admit the cannula for the enema, then you should gradually widen it with a small iron instrument, and place in it a piece of cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is sufficiently widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	 Similarly, if the opening is wide, then you should bring together its lips with a stitch and leave it in such a state that the enema can enter without addition.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	 And if the opening of the cavity from which the arm protrudes is elevated towards the upper parts, then dry it in the lowest place that is within it so that the arm may enter below, for when the arm is confined in the narrowness of the cavity, flesh will be generated in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	 And if it is not possible for you to dry the cavity within the environment of the lowest part as you wish, then bore a hole and prepare the member with a preparation by which the arm can gently pass through, according to what seems suitable to you, and so that no cause of retention remains in the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	 And take consolidative medicines which should be placed on the cavity in a suitable manner for what you want, extend those on linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	 And the cloth should be of such great quantity that it covers the entire chest; then make an incision with scissors on the right side of the opening of the chest, a little wider than the opening of the chest; and then extend over another clean cloth from the medicines according to the size of the incision, and place it there for a long time, so that the exit of the arm is relieved and the large cloth is not moved except perhaps once every few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	 Sure, here is my translation of the given text:
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	 And so that you may know whether what flows from his arm is much or little, or if it is digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	 And thus you should also consider the location of that vein; whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess there.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	 And when your treatment is prolonged in such a manner, and you see that the matter which is placed on the opening of the vein begins to adhere or almost adheres, then you should loosen or remove it on the third day, and when you uncover the wound, then change the cloth for another one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	 But if from the vein there is a long, thin substance coming out, do not despair about its adherence, for the healing of it is appropriate; for some men in whom the generation of flesh in their wounds is slow, and of those are ones in whom the opposite happens to them.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	 And if from the vein there is an excessive amount of undigested blood coming out for many days, know that the vein will not adhere; and if the adherence of the vein is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you should adjust the treatment to dryness in the medicines. And if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they should be made dry like a diachylon ointment, which has an excess of added pitch.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	 Based on the pattern and structure of the given text, here's a line-by-line translation attempt:
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	 The text appears to be describing a medical procedure involving the application of a poultice or salve on an area of the body. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	 And sometimes they are administered with long-stemmed aristolochia and celestial lilies (which are celestial lilies), and earth flour, and centaury, and use these simple or compound plants, grind them, sift them, and powder them over the honey that has been combed; and then use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	 And if the sinus is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then know that the corruption is in his lung, and it has already spread to the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you treat him with a fistula cure, as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	 On the treatment of paronychia, nail inflammation, and additional finger incisions and sections.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	 Paronychia is an abscess that forms under the nail of the finger or toe, and easily occurs in other fingers as well. As it prolongs and its treatment becomes less valued, it can become an abscess from an abscess, or it can corrupt, throwing pus into the root of the nail, fortunately corrupting the whole nail, and fortunately its corruption reaches the bone, making it stink, causing the end of the finger to be painful, and its color becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	 And so when you have that which we mentioned in the division and do not complete your treatment, then it is necessary for you to cut away with an iron all the excess that remains from the nail and then cauterize the wound nearby, because cautery is very helpful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	 But if the bone is healthy and the nail is intact, and the additions of the nail already compress the flesh in the divided parts inside, and they begin to sting and hurt that place, then it is necessary for you to put a thin ribbon under the edge of the nail that is stinging the flesh, and push it up and cut that flesh easily, and place on that which remains of the flesh some burning corrosive medicines until all is removed; and then heal that with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	 But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then it is necessary for you to cut away that part of the bone and extract it, because it will never heal if the bone is corrupt.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And if you see the rot and corruption going into the finger, then cut it off at one of the joints according to what seems best for your memory, and then heal that until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	 Based on the given text and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, let's translate the sentence line by line:
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	 Based on the given context and the pattern of the language, here's a line-by-line translation of the sentence:
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	 "And some of his are born in the root of the joint, or it is the birthplace of him in some nuts of the said.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	 "But he who is born in some nuts of the finger does not get sick, and this one who is born in the joints becomes very ill.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	 "And of those that are born fleshy, the cut is easier, and it is that you should incise him along his root with a flat scalpel.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	 "But of he who is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore beware of his incision.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 "But in he who is born in the finger, you must incise at the beginning of his flesh with a round incision into the bone, and then cauterize with one of those appropriate irons, and then cure him until he is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	 "But the consolidation that occurs between their visible joints, whether by birth of a man born thus, or by consolidation of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar cause, then you must cut that consolidation until the joints return to their natural shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	 "And then place between them dressings soaked in rose oil to prevent them from being easily consolidated, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	 "And similarly, if there is a callous on the palm of the hand, then dry out that callous according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	 "From a lack of virtue comes vice; these are called varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	 "Vices are varicose veins, and these are large, swollen veins filled with excess melancholic humors that appear in the limbs of the body, most commonly in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, workers, and bearers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	 "Therefore, it is necessary that you administer purging of the body with black hellebore some times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	 "But their cure with iron is done in two ways: one way is that it should be incised and the black blood drawn out; the other way is that the vein should be raised and all of it extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	 "The incision is done in this way: first, soak the leg with very hot water until the thick blood, which is muddy from the leg, has dissolved. Then strengthen the patient's leg to a point higher than the thigh, between the knee and the ankle, with a bandage. Then make a wide incision in one place, or two, or three on the vein, and then raise the black blood from below the leg towards you, moving upwards and downwards until the desired amount of blood has been drawn out, which will restore the patient's strength.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	 And then tie it [the bandage or compress], and command him [the patient] to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	 And repeat the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is known to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	 But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you who rub the patient's leg, if there are hairs on it, first put it in hot water and soak the leg with hot water until it becomes reddened and the veins are prominent; or if it is to be exercised by strong exercise, if a bath is not available to you, until the limb is scraped.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	 And then dry the cord in the right side of the vein by sectioning it along its length or at the back of it; you should place the needle in the lowest part of it, towards the sole [of the foot].
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	 And then open the vein with scissors and strip it of all parts until it is perceptible, and you should expect that what you see will become darker when it is rubbed.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	 And thus, as the blood flows out from the vein, if you see that it [the blood] is white, it should be a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	 And then place under it the reed until it is raised and separated from the vein, and suspend that with a thread.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	 Sure, I'll do my best to translate the sentence line by line:
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	 Sure, let's translate this line by line:
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	 And perform this operation such that you draw out the most superior or highest section until all has been removed; and then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	 And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then insert a double-threaded needle with a strong wire and tie it off, or insert a graft underneath it and rotate your hand in all directions until it is expelled.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	 And be careful not to incise it; for if it is broken, it becomes difficult for you to elevate that part and it has come upon the patient with harm because of this.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And when all of it has been expelled, then place over the location of the wound a piece of wool soaked in oil and both olive oil and non-olive oil, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	 And if the intestine is twisted and has tortuosity by which it is enveloped in parts, and it is not straight according to what we have said, then you must cut along all of its tortuous parts and at the points where it is enveloped, and then suspend it with hooks until you elevate it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	 And you must be careful with your section so that you do not incise the vein and that it does not harm it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and use your discretion with this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	 Based on the given context and the similarity of the language to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, I would translate this line as follows:
Forma de unci orp:	 Sure! Let's break down this sentence and try to understand its meaning before translating it into English:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	 It seems like the text is discussing a surgical procedure and the importance of being careful with certain actions to avoid harming the patient. Here's a line-by-line translation:
De extraccio venae cruris.	 The text "De extraccio venae cruris" translates to "About the removal of vein from the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	 Here is a translation of the given text:
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	 And often it is generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	 And the condition of this person is due to putrefaction, which comes from the colon and enters the body like snakes, worms, scorpions, and maggots generating between the colon and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	 And the sign of the onset of this condition is the appearance of a vein in the thigh, accompanied by severe inflammation; and then the place becomes blistered; and then the vein begins to emerge from that blister as if it were a root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	 And then when the extremity of it appears, you must wrap around it a lead weight that weighs between one and two drams. Attach this to it and leave the lead hanging from the thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	 And as often as any part of it comes out for some reason, wrap that in lead and attach it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	 And if it is prolonged, then you should cut off a part of it and wrap the rest; and do not cut it off directly until it has come out, because if you cut it off, it contracts and enters the flesh and causes an abscess and putrefaction in that place and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	 And from this vein, some men have experienced an emission that is in length of five palms and ten fingers, and it has come to my attention that one man emitted one of twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	 And if it is cut during the time of his treatment, then insert the needle into its opening and pierce it with a long thread through his body until everything in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; then treat it according to the cure for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	 And this vein sometimes has a tendency to move violently, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes to him with many openings, and is emitted from each opening violently.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	 Therefore, treat it as we have said in the division, and with what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	 About the cutting of worms generated under the skin, which is called cattle sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	 This illness is called cattle sickness in some places because often it happens to cattle and a worm rarely appears between the skin and flesh, which goes through the entire body ascending and descending, and shows its movement from member to member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	 And his generation is due to the putrefaction of some humors, just as happens with worms and serpents and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	 And he is feared for his malice, because when he goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the eye, then he quickly enters it and destroys the eye, and this causes many watchful nights.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	 And therefore, when you want to cure him and remove him, this is not done unless you know his movements and appearances to the touch, and then it is necessary that you have what is above him and what is below him bound tightly together, and then dry over him and extract him.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if he is buried in the flesh and you cannot find him, then place a cautery with fire on the spot where he dwells, and the greatest cause to be feared is his corruption with which he corrupts the spot as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	 And if you see him reaching the head near the eye, then bind the eyelid tightly with a strong bandage, and dry over it, and extract him; and it is necessary that the patient use purgatives to cleanse his body of bad, putrid humors, and he should avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	 This phrase translates to "On Section Against Pain in the Nose." The term "nafir" refers to the nose or nasal area, and "aegritudo" is used for pain or discomfort. So, the text discusses a medical procedure related to alleviating nose pain.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	 This sentence translates to: "This illness is called in our land 'nafir', and it is a pain that comes upon certain members, and it also changes from member to member." In other words, this condition affects various parts of the body and can move between them.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	 This sentence translates to: "And I have already seen that [condition] as I will describe it to you." The speaker is indicating that they have personal experience or knowledge of the condition they are about to describe.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	 Here's the translation of this sentence: "I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the superficial vein of the arm. And after it had been broken for an hour, I saw that inflammation move like blood rising towards this [location], but more lightly than being porridge, as if it were living silver when it runs from place to place." This passage describes a medical practitioner observing an unusual phenomenon in a patient's arm.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	 And then the pain moved from that place and settled into the muscle, and it stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	 Then it ran through the rest of her body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	 And then she told me that it was moving throughout her entire body as I had seen; and I was very amazed at the change in her and the speed with which it moved from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	 "And I had already seen this before in my dreams following that manner, but I have also seen cases where the pain is transferred from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	 "But I did not see this with the eyes as clearly as in a woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	 "And I did not think it was anything else except that it was due to the fact that the woman had an old body, with dry flesh and exposed veins, and in this state, it seemed to me that the windiness was transferred.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	 "And it is necessary that this transfer of pain does not appear in those who are delicate and with moist veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	 "And when you wish to heal them, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to the eye as we have said, so you strengthen yourself on top of it and lightly press and squeeze until the trapped windiness is expelled, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	 "But if you do not see it with your eyes, then you cure that by purging the body and expelling windiness, and treat them with stinking pills and with serpent pills and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	 "On the removal of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	 This medieval medical text appears to be discussing the different types of arrows used in surgery or medical procedures based on their specific features and intended locations in the body. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	 And that which concerns the members and organs in which it falls is of two types: because the members or their principal causes are as follows: the brain, the heart, the liver, the lung, the kidneys, the intestines, and the bladder, and their likenesses; therefore, when it falls into one of these members and you see signs of death, I will tell you about the cause shortly. Thus, it is necessary for you to avoid removing that arrow from those in which death occurs most frequently, namely in the member in which there are greater dispositions, and if these ill omens do not appear to you and the arrow is not hidden deep within the member, then remove it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	 Sure, let's translate the given sentence:
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	 And therefore if these signs appear to you, then abstain from the treatment and removal of the arrow, unless it is urgent.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	 But the signs of an arrow wound to the heart are such that it is close to the left nipple, and you feel as if it has struck something hard, not something soft; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse's movement, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and a foul smell, and fainting spells; and therefore you should know that death will come without delay.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	 And the signs when an arrow has struck the lung are frothy blood coming from the wound, and the veins near the neck are swollen, and there is a change in the patient's color, and they exhale a large amount of breath, and they crave cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	 And if the arrow strikes the diaphragm which is in the feet, then the pain will be near the small ribs, and there will be a great deal of vehement pain and sighing, and all the limbs' muscles will not feel well.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	 And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then it is easy to see some undigested food coming from the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	 And if the arrow hits the belly and is stuck in him, there may be some split in the wound or the flesh, or intestines which are torn apart, and there is no hope for his recovery by extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	 And if the arrow hits the bladder and causes urine to leak out, and some other cause leads to swelling outside, and there is strong pain in the patient, then know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	 But the other members such as the face, the neck, and the throat, the shoulders and the upper arms, the vertebrae of the back, the collarbone, the pelvis, the thighs and similar parts of the body are saved according to the best practices when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not a poisoned arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	 And I will tell you this about the nature of these arrows so that you can understand better their treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	 This happened because in a man an arrow hit the tear duct of his eye at the root of his nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the arrowhead in the ear canal, and he was healed, and there was no harm to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	 And another arrow was extracted from a Jew who had it in the gray of his eye, below the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden, but only a small tip that adhered to its shaft could be obtained, and it was a large arrow of the sharp Turkish arrows with an iron lion's head on which there were no holes.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	 The Jew died, and the arrow did not affect his eye badly.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	 And another arrow was extracted from a Christian man who had it stuck in his throat. It was an Arabic arrow, one of those with holes; and I made an incision on that between two tendons, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I carefully extracted it with that, and immediately removed the arrow, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	 And another arrow was extracted from a man who had it stuck in his belly, and I thought he would die from it; but after thirty days passed without any change in his condition, I made an incision on the arrow and pulled it out, and he was cured, and no bad accident befell him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	 And I saw another man in whom an arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound became infected on him, and after about seven years, the arrow came out of its own accord from the bottom of the body.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	 And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had lodged in her belly, and the wound was healed within her, and she did not change her disposition or appearance, and the woman did not suffer any damage in any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	 And I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his face, and the wound was healed, and the arrow broke off, not causing any pain here, and having a similar appearance to these (others).
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	 And the arrow was extracted from the king's chief man whose nose it had pierced in the middle, and it had already deviated slightly to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	 And I was called for his care immediately after the arrow had entered three days earlier.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	 And then I found the arrow wound to be very narrow; and then I inquired about it with a fine probe, and I did not feel it; but he felt pain below the right ear, and then I suspected that this pain was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	 And I plastered the area with a plaster that had attractive and digestive properties, thinking that this would soften the place so that the site of the arrow would appear to me, on which it could act.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	 Based on the given text and the similarity to medieval medical treatises, here's my best guess at translating the sentence:
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	 And then I applied on the wound a sharp corrosive medicine for several days until it opened up, and with a probe I searched for it, and found the tip of the arrow adhering to the bone.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	 And then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow became visible to me, and time passed with it for four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	 And after the wound was widened, and it became possible for me to insert forceps into it, and they remained there without coming out, I did not cease to try and contrive with various means until one day I succeeded in extracting it with forceps properly made, as will be shown at the end of this chapter; after which I restored the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	 And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I restored it and the wound was healed, and the patient was healed completely by whole health, and there was no cause for concern about him.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	 And I tell you the quality of extracting certain arrows so that you may use this rule and explanation regarding what I have not said, because the parts of this art and their definitions cannot be understood by narrative alone, nor can those books comprehend it.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	 And the wise craftsmen compare with little speech; and what is present over what is absent; and they discover new operations and new instruments when dealing with the intrusion of external causes in the art.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	 Therefore, I say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they are lodged except in two ways: either by attraction of the place into which they enter, or by the opposite of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	 And that which is thrown by the place into which it entered, either it is a bone arrow entering a fleshy place, and it is drawn out and expelled.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	 And if it does not obey the moment when it is caught, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh around it softens, and thus the attraction of it and its exit will be easier.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	 Similarly, if it is lodged in bone and does not obey your extraction, then leave it for some days and repeat this with attraction and moisture every day, and it will be expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	 And if it does not obey your extraction after several days, then you must bore around the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine awl until the place is widened by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	 And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head and has already penetrated one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of these symptoms appear in the patient, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it there until its being is equalized, for approximately a few days; because if the arrow reaches the cipher (brain stem), then death is not delayed.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	 And if the arrow is not lodged in the bone of the body alone and does not penetrate the brain stem, and the patient remains for a few days without any of these symptoms occurring to him, then you may proceed with the extraction of the arrow and the healing of the patient.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	 But if the arrow is deeply lodged and does not obey your attempt at removal, then you must administer trivel (or travil) around the circumference of the arrow as we have recommended, and then care for the wound until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	 But if the arrow is hidden within the body and cannot be felt, then you should search for it with a probe. And if you feel it, then remove it using appropriate instruments for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	 And if you cannot reach it due to the narrowness of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves or veins in its path, then make an incision on the wound until it is sufficiently widened and the arrow can be extracted.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	 When you administer the removal of an arrow from any location, then use a twisting motion with your hand using forceps until it complies; and be subtle and delicate so that the arrow is not broken and so that it is done with great difficulty for both yourself and for that removal.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	 If you cannot [remove the arrow] at that time, then leave it for several days until the surrounding areas heal, and then repeat [the attempt] when it has eased.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	 But if there is a contrary flow of blood, then administer the treatment that we have mentioned in its respective chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	 And be careful not to sever an artery, nerve, or tendon, and administer oil in any way possible to facilitate the removal of the arrow; and do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness, as I have recommended to you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	 And thus, by turning the arrow in such a way that the patient is according to the figure by which you should have aimed the shot of the arrow at him, for this is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	 But if that is not possible, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	 Here's my best attempt to translate the given text into English:
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	 "But if it is lodged in the bone, then you twist the arrow according to the opposite direction until the arrowhead presses into the bone, and widen it further as you insert it, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	 "Otherwise, leave it for some days, and then try again until it comes out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	 "And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, then you push it through with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	 "But if the shaft has broken off and you wish to administer an injection, then you insert that, if it is blunt, with a convex instrument so that it enters the hollow of it at the end of the arrow, and then push it through with it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	 "But if the arrow is hollow, then you push it through with a strong instrument entering that, because the arrow is made lighter by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	 "And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you cut out all the flesh in which there is the venom, if it is possible for you to do so, and then treat it with the appropriate remedy.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 "And if the arrow hits the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough for you to touch it with your finger, and it is possible to cut over it, then cut over it and be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, and extract it, and then sew up the wound if necessary, and treat it until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	 "Method of using forceps with which arrows are pulled out:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	  "Their ends should be like a bird's beak, made like a saw, to grip the arrow so that it does not slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	 "And from those are made various species, large and small, few and fine, according to the size of the arrow and its thinness, and the extent of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	 "Method for pushing the convex end of this instrument like a bird's wing to facilitate the entry of the arrow into it, and pushing out that arrow.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	 "Method for pushing out an arrow with a concave tip:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	 "like a ray, to facilitate its entry into the concave arrow and then it is pushed out with it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	 "On bloodletting of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	 "The veins commonly used for bloodletting are thirty, of which there are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins near the ears, called alhasisain; two veins on each temple; and two veins on each lacrimal duct of the eyes, called aspicientz; one vein in the middle of the forehead; one vein at the tip of the nose; two guide-veins on the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; these are the veins known as angelic; and there are two veins under the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	 And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of these is below the curvature of the wild boar's back; and the second is the saphenous, and its location is below the domestic pig's leg; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the wild boar's leg; and in the leg there are other similar veins.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	 The healing of the veins near the ears is for ancient cataracts, migraines, headaches, and old ulcers.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	 And the method of bleeding these is as I have told you: it should be done at the top of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed on the back of the head in the place where both veins are with a broad cloth with good friction; then strengthen the patient's neck with a bandage so that both [veins] and their places are near the ears in two depressed areas of the head; and you will look for it with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, this is the sign.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	 Then you take the scalpel, and it is that which cuts, and then you insert it under the vein until the phlebotomy reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	 "Then, carefully raise your hand with the vein and its connecting tissue towards the upper parts and make an incision in the vein using a sharp incisor.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	 "And let the length of the incision be about two finger widths or close to that; and make as much blood come out as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 "Then strengthen with poultices and let it heal on its own.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	 "And already at the beginning of this book, the incision and subsequent cauterization of these have been discussed.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	 "However, of the two arterial veins in the temples, the help of phlebotomy is for migraines that are ancient and severe, frequent headaches, and bodies with acute overflowing of excess fluids.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	 "And the method of phlebotomizing these is as I advise you: have the patient sit quietly until both veins are felt clearly by touch, and then show their pulse below your finger; then you will know with certainty.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 "Then raise the connecting tissue over the vein towards the upper part with your index finger, and insert the phlebotomy incision below it, and lift the vein upwards; and cut it in the same way as you did with the other two veins; and make the blood flow according to the amount of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	 Based on the provided context and similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	 And therefore the incision for phlebotomy of the vein on the forehead is similar to the incision for the cephalic vein in cases of ancient facial illnesses, migraines, rashes, and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And the quality of the phlebotomy depends on what I recommend to you; thus, the patient should strengthen their neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called the fossor, whose form is as follows:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	 Place the prominent point at the end of the fossor on that vein and strike it with a hammer or another heavy object in a similar manner, allowing the blood to flow as much as you want; then remove the puncture from the patient and secure it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	 And sometimes it is opened with a wide phlebotomy, but it is not necessary for the phlebotomy to be as sharp as the other phlebotomies; instead, it should be blunt-edged, and make that incision across, because the bone is very close and strong, and would break the thin phlebotomy.  (Note: The text uses "lat" to mean wide or broad, which is a common term in medieval medical texts.)
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	 "But the treatment of the two veins that are in the tear ducts of both eyes for itching of the eyes due to heat and pus in the eyes, and for facial diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	 "And the method of bloodletting is for the patient to hold his head with a bandage, and then you bleed him, standing over his head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	 "And the bloodletting should be done according to the width of the vein, a little less than the length of the finger, because there is not much flesh in that place; and if the bloodletting is too thin, it will break off the end of the vein.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 "Then let the blood run as much as is necessary for you, and press on those veins with a cloth, and hold them tightly for one night, and then release them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	 "But bloodletting from the nose vein is appropriate for acute fever and intense headache, and for facial diseases, migraine, and heat affecting the face, especially when chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	 "And the method for this bloodletting is that the patient should hold their head and then you take their nose with your left hand, and take a thin, long flebotome and place it in the middle of the tip of the nose following its length, because the vein is not felt here, and because the blood will begin to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	 It seems like the text is discussing a medical procedure involving bloodletting. Let's break it down line by line:
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	 This is my translation of the first sentence:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	 And then proceed to phlebotomize the vein along its length with a small phlebotomy knife; and then extract blood according to the prescribed amount or as necessary for treatment; and then repeat the process on the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	 And then untie the bandage and tightly bind both veins with a stronger ligature to prevent the patient from bleeding out, and leave it until morning when the wound has healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	 And the treatment of venous phlebotomy removes small boils and pustules from the mouth, corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	 And the quality of this venous phlebotomy is that you make the patient sit before you, and bind their neck with a bandage, then turn up their lips and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the indication of each is by their darkness, and this is more so because around these veins are small black veins; and then incise each one with an incising incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	 If there is doubt about which of them to use, and you do not know which it is, then you should proceed with the incision on the larger and more obvious one of them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	 And make a similar cut as the two veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	 But it is more common to incise both of the veins that are below the lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	 But the two veins below the tongue are more appropriately used for the phlebotomy of the cephalic at the preferred places on the wrist, for diseases of the uvula and mouth disorders.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	 The method of phlebotomizing these veins is to follow the patient's finger between your hands in front of the sun, and raise their tongue, and look under the tongue for two veins, one on each side, whose color inclines towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	 And then phlebotomize each one; and be careful not to lift your hand while phlebotomizing them, because under them are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And the veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those that are common in all men, and their phlebotomy is done according to two methods, either by placing the flebotomi mirtilat or olivar with a subtlety inclining towards; or by means of a flebotomi cutellar, which is called alnessil, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	 And this lancet is the one that you should choose for incision, and among those are species that are thin and subtle according to the width of the veins and according to the narrowness of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	 Method of venous bloodletting:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	 Let the lances of it be so made, and they should be used to open the prominent large veins that are full and convex, and those that contain coagulated thick blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	 And this is the method of venous bloodletting called "olivar":
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	 And this bloodletting is of lesser width and of a more subtle tip, and it is suitable for bleeding thin veins that contain thin citric blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	 But the benefit of bloodletting from the basilic vein, which is one of three main veins, is that it draws blood from patients suffering below the elbow and the neck, as well as those who have issues with their feet and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	 It is advisable for the bloodletter, when performing this bloodletting, to be very careful and cautious, because below it there is an artery. If he errs and strikes it with the lancet, he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood. Therefore, one should not bleed it with a pointed lancet; instead, one should first make an incision with a lance. ›
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if the basilica does not appear clearly visible, then you should leave that [vein] and move to another one, or look for a branch of it; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm, because that is more prominent; and in addition to that, perform phlebotomy on the ankle similarly as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	 But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the same person, then you should touch the spot in front of the constriction of the arm until you recognize the pulse point. Then mark it with a sign and bind the arm; and then ligate the vein with a concave section using phlebotomy similarly as we have said; and be careful that the incision does not fall near the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	 And when you see, as the ligature is tightened, swelling in the place where you have marked with a sign, then that swelling is from the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	 And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy like the urine of a child, and the blood is subtle and red, then know that it is from the artery; and then cut and press your finger over it for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the blood has been cut off—for many times it has been cut off—then tighten the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	 And watch over the patient's urine and be careful of him, and do not allow him to walk for several days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	 But if the blood is not cut off and there is no medicine available for this, then you should cut the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is constricted, and the blood is cut off. Or take some powdered henbane, make a poultice with it, take half of it and apply it strongly over the vein with a bandage and with powder between one day and the other.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	 And then if the blood is cut off, it's good; and if not, then cure it with the water of which it was mentioned earlier in the place where the cutting off of blood flows.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	 And the stopping of his blood is difficult due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of tying off the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	 But from the superficial vein, phlebotomy is beneficial for extracting blood from the top part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilic vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said. 😊
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	 And if the vein is between two nerves, then you open the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	 The help of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to attract blood from the head and improve the illnesses of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	 It is necessary in this case, if you want the phlebotomist to prick with an olive-tree phlebotomy or a myrtle-tree phlebotomy; because it is the safest of all the veins, for there are no arteries nor nerves left.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	 However, you must ensure that with the phlebotomy you do not prick only the head of the snake, but rather seek a lighter spot, and note it if it is found with the first percussion that it overlaps with the phlebotomy in some places.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	 However, it is very easy for an inflammation to occur in some men, when they are not phlebotomized on the first percussion, but do not note this inflammation afterwards.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	 However, the quality of that phlebotomy and its effects are many, in which you must think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	 The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is administered only for the preservation of health and with hope and caution to prevent illnesses, and that it be done on one of the veins that are in the arm, namely: cephalic, dark, and basilic; and that it be done at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in the spring and autumn, and in winter after eating, when there are signs of fullness.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	 And it should be done phlebotomy on the third day or as soon as possible after three hours have passed from the start of the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	 But phlebotomy that is administered should be done more when it brings convenience and necessity, either at night or during the day, at any hour and in all circumstances.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	 And it is advisable that a child should not be subjected to phlebotomy until he has fourteen years, and a pregnant woman should only be subjected to it from the fourth month up to the seventh, and the elderly should not be subjected to it if they have already passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	 And when someone wants to be subjected to phlebotomy by any means, it is advisable that they clean their intestines before the phlebotomy with a clyster of lion [herb], if there are many retained fissures in them, so that the veins do not draw the superfluities from the intestines during the phlebotomy, which are corrupted and harmful to the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	 And patients who are clearly suffering from seasickness or drunkenness should not be subjected to phlebotomy, nor those who are recovering from illness or intoxication until they have recovered from it, nor hydrocephalic patients, and phlebotomy should be especially feared in cases of colic, vomiting, abdominal mass, frequent coitus, heavy labor, fasting, vigils, and any cause that dissolves virtue, whether bodily or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	 And then consider in the subtlety of humors before this, if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medicines if it is possible for them to be directed towards this.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	 And then enter a bath if no cause prohibits it, or engage in some exercise so that the blood becomes thinner.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And perform phlebotomy on the patient at the foot of the bed, as it should be done around the third hour of the day, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	 And make sure that the patient's feet are protected on that day from all evil animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all physical accidents, such as work, unnecessary pain, sex, and similar activities.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	 And at his bedside, place fragrant substances with pleasant smells and balms, according to the amount of affordability.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	 And have the person performing phlebotomy sit on a cushion that is higher than the patient's cushion.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	 Then have the patient extend their arm and rub it with their own hand two or three times, and then bind the wound tightly with a bandage, wrapping it twice around.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	 And if the stricture is temporary, for a stricture that is not equal or a stricture with excess fluid, then you should prohibit blood flow; or if it is with softening, then you should prohibit the body from releasing blood.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	 And before the operation of bloodletting, he whose veins are to be opened should rub his hands together until the veins swell and become discernible by touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	 And before the bloodletter anoints the place of incision with a little proper oil; and then he places his left index finger on that vein, below the place where he wants to perform the bloodletting, so that the vein swells a little, and the pulsation is stopped. For among the veins it is the one that flees like a string when you should perform the bloodletting, and it is full of windiness, and when you place the incision on it, it contracts, and the bloodletter is discovered; and the incision does not touch the vein, and if it touches, then it is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	 Therefore, for this reason, the bloodletter must be skilled and attentive to all these reasons.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	 And then remove the fleam [bleeding instrument], but if the vein is opened only once, then it's good; and if not, you should try again a little further from that spot, or on top of it with haste, if the spot isn't swollen.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	 And if the spot is swollen or the patient becomes faint, then leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage, because strong drawing will bring forth pus quickly, nor should one enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	 And then attempt bloodletting again if needed.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	 And if the opening is small and blood flows slowly, and you fear that it won’t flow in the desired quantity, then you should attempt bloodletting again in that same location according to what is correct, adjusting the incision a little, and do so hastily before the spot becomes swollen, because many men require only a small opening.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	 But if you see that it is already swollen, then do not attempt [bloodletting] again in that spot, because no cause is needed for you; and place some olive oil cloth over it, because it relieves the body of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	 And olive oil is better for this purpose than any other oil.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	 And similarly, in case of cutting with a knife in all cases of bloodletting, with which we open the veins to prohibit the body from bleeding, and they make tiraqua alfadoc and sagzenea when one of them is placed on the wound, because the blood is subtilized and revolved when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	 And if in the place of bloodletting a large abscess is generated, which usually happens, and especially to those who have not been bled except for this time, or when the vein is barely opened, then you cut [the skin?], and place a sponge soaked in water and salt over the wound, slightly pressed, and hold it there for an hour, because it will dissolve.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	 And it is necessary to do this near the end of the blood flow from that vein with the help of another or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	 And if any blackness or greenness remains in the area for several days, do not worry about it; and if you wish, place over it some aloe and myrrh dissolved in vinegar, or some juice of mint or marjoram or something similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	 And many times such abscesses and swellings require bloodletting from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	 And so place your hand on it, and if you find softness, you should apply pressure to that area, for that swelling is bad and harmful; and therefore be careful not to press on it with any cause of this, because blood will flow from the artery strongly.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	 Make an emplaster with water that has been boiled and cooled, so that the area becomes hardened, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	 It is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the prevailing color over the blood that appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	 Because if the blood is black, then let it flow until it turns red; and likewise if you see that it is thick, then let it flow until it becomes thinned out; and likewise if it is sharp, until its sharpness is removed.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	 It is necessary for someone who is full and strong and has a need to have blood drawn in one sitting that the phlebotomy of the vein be enlarged and that the phlebotomy be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	 And for someone who is weak, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary to draw blood from that person in several sittings, and that the incision be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	 "And the best method in phlebotomy of a vein is that it be a transverse cut, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	 "And this method of phlebotomy saves from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to length and width.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	 "And if fainting is likely to occur during phlebotomy, you should prepare the patient beforehand with a little bread infused in vinegar or simple oxymel; and draw out one-third or one-fourth of the blood.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	 "And if there is a cold complexion, then before phlebotomy take bread infused in myrrh syrup or in honey syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in strongly aromatic and fragrant syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	 "And if fainting occurs during phlebotomy due to the loss of too much blood, then they should drink water with meat and strongly fragrant syrup; and use aromatics with aloe, and anoint their feet with it.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	 "And use the other remedies that we mentioned in the section on fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	 And if one wants to raise the arm and dissolve their blood according to the method, it is necessary for the person whose phlebotomy is for major evacuation, and whose virtue is cold, that they evacuate the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	 But if one wants to raise their arm and expel their blood according to times, and their body is strong, then they should do this approximately seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	 But if one wants to draw blood from their body in the opposite direction of the part that is inclined, it should be raised on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	 But in the body where there is a lot of blood already cut and it is acute and causes fever, it should be expelled from it in one time and a large quantity should be expelled and the opening should be widened until syncope occurs, because you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and you should place your hand over his pulse where the blood comes out, so that he does not die instead of fainting, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	 And it is not recommended when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood, as the orifices of the vein are already closed and the flow of blood is difficult, that you press firmly on it with force and that it is slightly extended, for this is very harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	 Hold the lance within until it is properly bloodletting; or remain with the sharpness of the fleubotomy that has coagulated the blood in the orifices of the vein; or place on it some alfarach, or sage, and compress gently until the blood has come out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	 And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	 And if necessity requires you to evacuate the blood accordingly, and there is no other option, then bleed that person in another place or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	 And the vein called "tendon of the arm" is bloodletting in place of the saphena or the basilica, when these are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	 And the quality of his bloodletting is that the patient puts their hand in hot water until the needle becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	 And then it should be tightly bound with a bandage and a moderate pressure; and then make an incision according to the smallest transverse direction, not longitudinally or along the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	 And make the opening wide and your incision should be small on that joint, just enough to insert the tip of your finger.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	 And if the blood flow is profuse, then you should immerse your hand in hot water and allow the blood to run into the water until you achieve what you need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	 But if you are in the summer days, then you are exempt from immersing your hand in hot water, and instead place the vessel of blood in hot water during the winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	 And this vein's incision is safer than any other vein, because below it there are no pulsating veins or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	 And the incision of the little finger on the right hand is suitable for liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	 And the method of this incision is to bind the hand tightly with a bandage or your hand, after you have placed it in hot water until the vein is swollen and clearly visible; then make an incision transversely. And if you cut through that entirely, no harm will come from it.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	 And ensure that you do not perform phlebotomy with your hand, because after that the nerves mentioned will be exposed and without flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	 And then dip your hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not dip it in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the mouth of the vein, and its flow will be blocked.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	 And when the blood has been extracted according to the necessary amount, then place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not close immediately; and similarly, you should do this with any narrow vessel.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	 However, the benefit of performing phlebotomy on the left hand is that it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	 And perform the phlebotomy on him in a similar manner as you did with the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	 And the benefit of phlebotomy on the saphenous vein is for diseases located below the abdomen, such as uterine disorders, retained menses, and chronic illnesses of the hips and thighs, along with similar conditions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	 And the method of performing phlebotomy on this patient is to have them place their foot in hot water and make friction until the veins appear; then bind the foot with a bandage; and the site for the vein, which should be pierced with the needle, is on the sole of the foot, from where branches extend across the surface of the foot like scattered twigs.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	 And therefore for a bloodletting procedure, place the large cup below the knee, towards the ankle, on the thickest part of the leg, because it is better and healthier.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	 And if you are performing bloodletting on the surface of the foot, be careful not to cut the nerves that lie beneath the skin on the surface of the foot. Place your bloodletting tool at an angle as if you were trying to cut through it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	 And may the bloodletting be successful.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	 However, if the blood flow is stopped; then immerse the patient's foot in hot water and let the blood flow until it has been completely evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	 And if the bloodletting instrument misses its mark on the first attempt, then try again with the instrument a little further up, because the area is healthy; and do not be afraid of making a mistake, but rather be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	 Do the same for the saphenous vein on the other foot as well.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	 And for the sciatic vein, the location is also as we have said, below the ankle, towards the heel on the outer side of the foot.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	 And the remedy for his bloodletting is to apply a poultice to the hip when it is caused by an excess of blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	 And the quality of his bloodletting is that the patient enters the bath, quickly and strongly clamps the artery from the thigh above the ankle on four said things with a long, subtle bandage, because it only appears in this manner.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	 And so when it appears, then you bleed according to each case as is possible for you and according to the transverse vein, which is better; or you cauterize it by cautery or dry it by drying, because the place of him is healthy.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	 And it is very common in many men; and if you find this, and it does not appear entirely to the senses, then bleed some part of him, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot opposite the so-called auricular and annular [veins].
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	 And beware of the nerves, and let run as much blood as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	 And then immediately release the constriction and place on the bleeding spot cotton and strengthen the area, for it is lightly healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	 Of cupping and of the qualities of using those [techniques].
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	 Cupping is done with horns, or glass, or ivory.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	 And cupping is done in two ways: one is with scarification and bloodletting, and the other is cupping without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	 And this purgation, which is without incision, occurs in two ways: either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	 And the purgations that are administered with incision and bloodletting are fourteen places on the body: one of which is where the purgations are placed in alnocrati, which is at the back of the head; the middle place of the two parts of the neck together; purgations under the chin below the jawbone below the mouth; purgations on both temples; purgations on the big toe, which is at the end of the foot; purgations in both armpits, which are at the ends of both arms; purgations in both knees; and purgations in both hips.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	 And purgation does not extract blood except from the small veins spread throughout the flesh, and therefore it does not catch the virtue through them, just as it happens in phlebotomy; nor is it necessary for purgation to be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused by repletion until the entire body has been evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	 But if necessity requires purgation for illness or a continuum, administer it at the beginning of every month, in the middle, and at the end, or whenever necessary.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	 The text you've provided appears to describe various symptoms and conditions related to blood disorders or illnesses in medieval medical terminology. Here’s a line-by-line translation into English:
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	 And so when the patient experiences any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle part of the month, then command that a bloodletting be done because two or three hours have passed since noon.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	 Additionally, bloodletting from the neck is done when that causes heaviness in the head and it becomes sunken in the eyes; but it should be an evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	 And this bloodletting is in the location for phlebotomy of the cephalic [vein].
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	 And it is not allowed that this be used by someone who is of complete coldness, or in whom there is a fever, because it causes great harm to them.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	 And for this reason, the old should not use this, and those whose heads are afflicted by coldness.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	 But for that one who persists in using it, there is risk of forgetfulness; and therefore you should command the bloodletter to pause his hand a little with the bloodletting cup after leaving, out of fear of causing forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	 But bloodletting from the elbow is in the location for phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilic: and therefore it causes shortness of breath, and constriction of the lung, and splitting of the lung tissue, and coughing, and pleurisy.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	 And it is necessary to remove the foment from below a little, because if it is placed beneath, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	 And apply the alhagdahan foment to pains in the head and to ophthalmia, migraine, pleurisy, and toothaches; it is an alternative to phlebotomy of the basilica vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	 And it is necessary that you order the fomentor not to press with his hand during scarification, lest he cut the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	 And apply the foment below the chin for alcol in the mouth, and for corrupt gums, and for similar diseases of the mouth; it is an alternative to phlebotomy of the aliheric veins which are on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	 However, the foment that is made with two spatulas is used for cephalic vein phlebotomy, which is done to reduce heat in the body.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	 And the foment made with two parts of the leaves of the fig tree is useful as an alternative to phlebotomy of the three main veins: basilica, jugular, and cephalic, because it attracts the blood from all the smaller veins that are in the flesh, and from the smallest veins of the other larger veins, until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	 And command the bloodletter not to proceed too much in scarification, because the place is denuded of flesh, and only its nerves and arteries remain.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	 And it is a cupping glass with which one is cupped over the buttocks, and it is applied to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the ulcers beneath them.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	 And it is necessary to command the bloodletter that it be a large cupping glass and that it be of brass, because the place requires strong suction; and let the subtle and finely drawn cupping glasses be scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	 But cupping of the thighs is reduced by obvious reduction, because they draw blood from all over the body, and it is applied to old pains of the joints and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation, and it is applied to melancholy and sadness; and they serve as a substitute for venesection of two veins, and for hanging, and for two ribs.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	 However, they greatly weaken the whole body and cause syncope in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	 And for the cupping of the two veins, the treatment is similar to the treatment for cupping of the two thighs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	 And do not cease repeating this and continuing until you see the area already reddened and swollen, and that the redness of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	 And then you make an incision and suck out little by little, and afterward consider the patient's condition.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	 Because a man who is of tender flesh and few pores should be incised only once, and not again, lest the area become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	 And order the cupping therapist to enlarge the incision a bit and apply suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	 And if the blood is thick, then it is necessary to incise twice, because in the first incision the pathway for the blood and its fluidity is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	 But in the second, to the thorough examination of the extracted thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	 And if the blood is very foul, then a third incision should be made in order to obtain the last of it.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	 And finally, when we want to extract a little blood at a time or a small amount, one incision is sufficient for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	 And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we incise with many incisions; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to incise with a wide incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	 And the depth of the cut should be just as deep as the cord.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	 And if the one whose cord is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are tight, it is necessary that the places of the leeches be anointed with gentle, open, resolving substances; in the summertime, such as oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of wild cucumber; and if it is wintertime, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or of St. John's wort, and similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	 And if the swelling is thick and harsh, then let the oil be of amaranth, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and similar substances.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	 But if the one who is to be bled has large pores and soft skin, then it is necessary that he be forbidden from oil, and it is necessary that for this person the places where the leeches are to be applied be washed with vinegar or harsh water of sulfur, or water of wild cucumber, or water of borage, and similar substances.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	 And if the blood of that person is very fluid, wash their wounds with vinegar or water mixed with myrtle and sumac, similar to those (wounds).
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	 And if the superfluities of that person are thick, wash their wounds with old vinegar, or water mixed with savory (satureja), or with an infusion of dill (anet) or chamomile, and similar to those (wounds).
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	 And it is necessary that the wound dressing be protected before bathing. It is also necessary that it be administered shortly after bathing for one or two hours, and it is necessary to sleep near the wound.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	 What must be done to regulate the blood flow of a patient before bleeding?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	 It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the blood of the person who needs to be bled or the person who will perform the bleeding is choleric and hot, and there is inflammation in their blood, it is necessary for them to take cooling substances, such as acetous myrtle berries, endive with vinegar, lettuce, celery, syrup of roses, and similar.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	 And they should eat foods such as chicken, lean meats, and foods flavored with vinegar, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	 The sentence you've provided appears to be from an ancient medical text, possibly describing a treatment for a specific condition involving the spleen. Here is my attempt at translating it line by line:
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	 "And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and phlebotomy, the drink should be greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	 "And it is necessary to give some men to drink tincture of alpharac or musk medicine, which is muskade, or alcelita before bloodletting or phlebotomy, so that the main members are comforted and the blood is thinned; and they should not take that coldness.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	 "But the bloodletting that is done without scarification should be bloodletting that is placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and on the bladder, in the joints' places, and the anklebone, because these members do not tolerate scarification upon them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	 "And it is not sought for them but the drawing of blood from a member, just as they place a cupping glass on the breast in an illness with nosebleed; and they use this so that the bloated and thickened wind in the member may be dissolved, just as they place [it] on the abdomen and the navel; because this thins the member, cools it, and removes pain by resolving the wind.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	 "And it is placed on the temples when a headache or fever occurs, because by virtue of strong drawing it removes headaches and eradicates fevers from their place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	 And likewise, when placed upon the liver and spleen, you should ensure that there is no wind trapped in them.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	 These winds are to be administered with suction alone; and some winds are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	 And some winds are administered full of tepid water in cases of spleen disease.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	 And this is why the wind should be filled and made larger: it is hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been infused.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	 Form of wind administration with fire: the width of the orifice should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the amount of pressure should be half a palm's length; and on his side, in the circular area, it should be half the size, and the hole should be small, just enough to insert a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	 It should be made of round iron or copper, with thick edges, smooth and clean, so that it does not injure the member on which it is placed. 》
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	 And in the middle of this rod should be a crosspiece of iron or iron, where a candle with fire is placed.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	 And this windpipe should be much larger than the one we mentioned earlier, and the smaller one is used according to the patient's condition and state of health.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	 And the cupping glasses for infants and debilitated individuals are different from those for youths and larger bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	 And the manner of placing this cupping glass with fire on a member is to extend the wool with decent firewood in front of a few candles made of wax, and place it in the middle of the transverse rod at the midpoint of the cup, so that the fire is ignited around the base to avoid burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	 Then it should be placed on the patient's limb, and the finger should be on the orifice that we mentioned, until when we have the cups and do not need them anymore, remove the finger and let the vapor escape from that orifice; at that moment, the cup will dissolve immediately.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	 Then ignite the wool according to its nature, and repeat this if you need to do it again.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	 However, in the cupping for pleurisy patients, with water, which does not have a transverse rod or opening, it is only administered when it is filled with water and placed on the limb alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	 And this is its form: And the larger this cup is, the better it is, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	 Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	 Sanguissugas (leech therapy) is not used on all members but only on those in which it is not possible to apply cupping, due to their small size, such as the hand and gums, or on members devoid of flesh, such as the tongue and nose and similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	 And the quality of using those leeches is that you have found them in clean waters of stagnant water.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	 And then they should be laid in clean water day and night until they become sluggish, so that there is no impurity left in their stomachs; and the body should first be purged with phlebotomy and cupping; and then rub the patient's limbs until they redden; and then place them on the patient.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	 And when they are full and fall off.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	 If it is possible to suck the area with a cup (ventoza), it is better for healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	 And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with warm water; and rub it and press it out.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	 And if the body's blood flow is prolonged near the application of leeches and it exudes (bleeds), then you should dip a cloth in warm water and place it on top until the bleeding subsides.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	 And if the blood is excessive, then sprinkle on it powdered vitriol or substances with similar astringent properties until the blood is absorbed; or apply cooked fava beans to the area and leave them until they adhere, at which point the blood should be absorbed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	 And, if necessary, use leeches for bloodletting, changing them as often as possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	 And if the use of leeches is forbidden by law, then wash the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the site until it draws blood; and then apply a bandage, because these will quickly absorb any blood that they come into contact with.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	 And when you want them to close, sprinkle a little powdered alum, salt, or ash on them, and they will close quickly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	 Thus begins the prologue of the third part: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	 This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of bone fractures and dislocations.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	 Oh son, know that the foolish doctors and common people who have never read the books of the Ancients or studied their words boast about this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	 And for this reason, this method of the learned in our land is concealed; and I have not forgotten it at any time, but rather have applied what follows, only after a long study of the books of the Ancients and reflection on their understanding, until I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	 And therefore I directed my efforts to experimentation and study throughout my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	 And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and on which my experiment has passed; since here I have shortened it for you others and delivered you from the labor of lengthiness; and I have shortened it at the end of shortening; and I have shown it at the end of explanation; and I have formed in it many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as is done by addition of explanation, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	 Chapter one.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	 Summary and collection of the causes of bone fractures, from which a necessary premise is required before we begin to recall the members fractured and diverse in each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	 Therefore, in the prologue to this chapter we will state the sum of the discourse; and the chapters at the beginning of which it is necessary for the craftsmen and surgeons to stand firm on the truth of those; that is you and those who are prompt and know or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	 And so I say that when it comes to a fracture, dislocation, twist or fall, it is necessary for you to begin with bloodletting or purging, or both at the same time, unless there is some reason against it, such as weakness of virtue, if the person affected is a child, an old man in decline, if it is a time of very hot weather, or of very cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	 Therefore, let him be content with food such as fresh herbs and birds and crabs; and avoid fatty meats and filling himself with all foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure to prevent an abscess, and if you do not fear a discharge of matter in the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	 And then return the patient to his previous diet with which he was accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	 And so when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary for the patient to be fed with nutritious foods that are thick and dense, in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from boiled wheat with water, rice, cabbage, peas, and cow's stomachs, and goose, and fresh pork, and fat similar to these, and with this diet the fracture coagulates more lightly and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	 And know that the bones of those who are in their first youth and in old age cannot be continued and healed according to their nature due to the drying out of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	 And they are always continued and healed according to their nature due to the drying out of those members, and those that are in their old age are also continued and healed, as are the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	 However, nature adjusts and binds over the broken bone from any similar cause, like glue, which adheres and strengthens it until it is completely healed and firmly joined together, so that it reaches its end in strength and firmness, just as fire at first, until some cause prevents it from doing its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	 And for this reason, it is necessary to give the patient foods that are heavy, viscous, and dense, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	 There are many kinds of fractures according to the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	 And know that the types of fractures are different according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the bone in the leg is different from the fracture of the bone in the head; and the fracture of the bone in the foot is different from the fracture of the bone in the hand; and similarly, all the other members are different from one another.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	 And I come with memory of every type of fracture, distinguished in its own chapter separate from others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	 Various types of fractures within themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	 And the species of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for some fractures are curved while others occur in stars; and sometimes they are fractures according to the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the patella and shins and splints, both simple and compound, as is done with the pen when it is ready to write, and there is a fracture with bruising and dislocation in the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	 And each type has its own proper treatment or torment for the restoration of it, as will be remembered in the subsequent distinguished chapters.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	 Signs of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	 And by this bone fracture is known: it is the twisting of it, and the prominence and appearance of it to touch, and so also when you compress that with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	 And therefore when there is no apparent twisting or discomfort in that place and you do not feel it when you touch the bone with motion and the patient does not find great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	 And know that the location, when it is bent and not cut into two or anything else that does not happen to it, as all parts of its companion are moved away, then you should begin from your hour to straighten the habitant who has an abscess.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	 And if an abscess appears on it, then leave it alone for several days until the abscess subsides; and afterward, wrap it in any manner you can with softness and skill.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	 And know that the restoration and treatment of it is easier than in the bone on which this happens.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	 Then strengthen it according to how you will remember it later.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	 But if the bone is affected, then it is necessary to extend this broken member into two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; either with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords, or with one cord and a hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	 And it should be your position with which you place the member in its natural form while the parts are extended from the broken limb, then make sure that you return those additions with skill and in any manner you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	 And be careful according to your strength that nothing happens to the patient due to your operation, neither pain nor injury; and exert yourself according to your power to apply one bone with its companion in the best possible way.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	 And it is appropriate that at this moment you touch with your hand that area, and if you see any different cause here, correct that and equalize it according to the amount of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	 And avoid vigorous extension and compression, as many foolish doctors do, which often cause an abscess to form due to their operation, or cause contraction in the limbs, as we have seen happening due to the operations of their vigorous extensions.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	 And promptly join together, and maintain balance, decent operation, and stricture of that limb, and rest and tranquility; counsel the patient on this matter and make them promise not to move it during their watchfulness or sleep, observe their turning and agitation, and manage their emptying and all their movements with all your skill; and ensure that the position of the limb is such that it is safe from pain, for the cause is that when one feels pain or injury in the arrangement of the position of the limb; then you should change it to another arrangement where they do not feel pain; and be careful with this, so that the position is straight and equal, in order that the limb does not become twisted when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	 And for those that are small like the arm and the finger and the thumb, then it is necessary that the covering be of soft, fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	 But for those that are large such as the thigh or the leg, it is necessary that in these there be a binding of tough and hard cloth, because the strong binding holds the large member firmly on all sides with tightness, so that in it no wound can enter.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	 And then begin, at the time of your evacuation of waste, place suitable bandages for this, on the location of that fracture with three or four bindings according to what the member needs; and hold your hand firmly a little with the binding.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	 And then come to that on the higher part of the location of the fracture, and tighten more so that your binding does not loosen with which you have held the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	 And then extend yourself with the bandage of the location of the fracture a little, and gradually loosen the tightness until you take from the location a large part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	 And then take another bandage and wrap it around the broken part with a covering, and then come to the bindings on the lower part of the fracture; and let your operation be in the tightness of the binding and in the loosening of that according to what we have said above in the first covering.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	 And you should place between the wool packs of linen or cloth with which the contortion of the fracture is wrapped, if there is a contortion; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	 And place another bandage over it, and wrap this bandage with these carefully made steel bandages immediately if there is no swelling or abscess in the area, and then place on it whatever drains the abscess and removes the swelling; leave it for a few days; and then strengthen the steel bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	 And the steel bandages should be made of reed cane, or well-formed bamboo, or pine wood; or palm ribs. Each steel bandage should be as wide as this shape and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	 However, the steel bandage that is placed over the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the other steel bandages, and the length of the steel should be according to the size of the limb. Then strengthen the steel bandages with another bandage according to your initial tightness; then tie it on top with a decent thread as we have said about tightness, and it is that your tightness should be according to the location of the fracture more, and the further away from the fracture, the less the tightness.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	 And it is important that the threads be medium in thickness and delicacy, and be of silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of some foolish people using their threads of linen cord, this is a great error, because when the suture is tightened, equality would not be maintained.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	 And very thin threads are not suitable, because with them you will not achieve through tightening what you want, and it is not appropriate for there to be more than a finger's width between stitch and stitch.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	 And if the patient is bothered by the ends of the threads near the stitches, then place under those stoppings a piece of wool or flannel until such time that it does not cause harm to him.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	 Sometimes a fracture occurs with a wound, and there is a disruption in the tendon, and I will come to that in particular in Chapter Two.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	 And know that not every fractured limb is bound with bandages on the first day; the reason for this is that when the limb is large, it is not suitable to place bandages on it except after about six or seven days, or more, according to your certainty of avoiding cautious pus.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	 And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients used to restore, which are placed on fractures and dislocations and sprains.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the provided text:
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	 And prepare it thus as it is, except that you sieve it with egg white, and place the preparation of him not too thick nor too thin; and then use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	 And another way to make a plaster that heals fractures and dislocations is: take asafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and milfoil which is wild chamomile, all in the quantity of ten drams; myrrh and aloe in the quantity of five drams; and aloe in the quantity of twenty drams. All should be ground and sieved and mixed with either alkaline water or egg white if the patient's complexion is scorched; then use this plaster, for it has a good composition and heals broken bones gently, and it helps many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	 Another way to make a plaster for healing fractures and dislocations: take milfoil and equal parts of white altea, ten drams each; myrrh and aloe, five drams each; acacia, six drams; and Armenian bole, twenty drams.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	 All should be ground in a mortar with a pestle, sieved, and mixed with water or egg white and then applied.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	 In this plaster, there is no virtue of restoration, it cauterizes and expels pustules, and properly relieves pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	 Another method of plaster that restores the broken: take leaves of wild fig tree and wild poppy; grind them all together and make a plaster from it.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	 A method of shortened plaster administered for the restoration of a fractured bone and when you want resolution from the remaining pustule: take roots of mallow, chamomile, and violet flowers; grind them all together and mix with flour, then bind it with wine if the member is not scraped.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	 But if it is scraped, then make that plaster with moist coriander water or with water and apply it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	 Another method of plaster stronger in resolution than the first, when a hard pustule occurs for the restoration of the member: take roots of mallow and linseed, balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, all equally; grind them all together and mix with willow water or sweet water or wine, according to the quality of the member and its color rest.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	 Sure, I'll translate that line for you:
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	 Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	 Method to make a plaster for wounds and pain: Take equal parts of barley, chickpeas, human hair cut or bird feathers, althea (holy thistle), and salt; grind them together, sift them, mix them, and make a poultice.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	 But the amount should be adjusted according to how long the bandage needs to stay on. Consider if there is pain or swelling, or if the bone has moved from its place; then do not remove the bandage for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	 And if there is severe pain or swelling or inflammation at the site, then cut or remove it immediately and take off the poultice from him.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	 And take a cloth of linen and a marine sponge, wet it with warm water, and with that wash the area until the swelling subsides and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour; then place on it wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rosemary oil, and bind it overnight until you are sure of a cautious abscess, and that the inflammation of the member has subsided and the pain has been removed from him.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	 And then apply a thin and small plaster to that constriction and do not tighten it too much with your first binding, and make it subtle with that within which it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	 And if you see that the abscess and redness and pain and swelling and all the symptoms have already healed completely, and you need to remove the plaster and binding, then apply the same as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	 And if no cause occurs in the member of those that we have mentioned, then do not release it except after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to what seems to you by the dislocation of the member, as we have said, within which the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh in that place.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	 Then tighten the binding more than your first binding, and adjust it according to the patient's thickness of flesh, as their memory allows.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	 However, if you see the place of the fracture is already dried out and thinner than it should be, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, moisten that area with lukewarm water every time you release it; and this should be done for three days in total; and loosen the binding slightly, and through this operation, the nutrition will flow to the member and it will heal slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	 Here's the translation of the given text:
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	 And I have not seen anyone do this, which is why it seems more reasonable that one does not do this.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	 Chapter Two: On Fractures of the Head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	 There are many types of fractures, and their forms vary greatly, with different causes. Some fractures occur due to a blow from a heavy object, which breaks all the bones into pieces, just as it would split wood; this type is called compound fracture. Another type occurs when a sharp object cuts through part of the bone and the skin, but does not penetrate completely through; this type of fracture is called simple or closed fracture.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	 The wound from these two types of fractures can be large or small, and the fracture can be compressed or crushed. Its cause is a blow with a hammer or fall onto rock, or similar objects.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	 And this type of fracture can either be penetrating, approaching the layer of fat beneath the bone; or it can be on the surface of the bone, and the wound from these two types of fractures can be large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	 And there is also a type of fracture that occurs within the bone, in the delicate substance called bone marrow; this type of fracture is called hairline or greenstick fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	 And it is a fracture that is caused either by falling or by the strike of a stone or similar object, which makes some layer of bone enter between the divided parts within, and it is made in the concave place as occurs to clay pots when they are struck, and their entrance is divided into parts within.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	 And this is most commonly done in the bones of children, such as in the heads of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	 And to all these types of fractures, there are weights like stars separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	 And I will return with a reminder of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	 And recognize all these types of fractures by detection upon them, and by investigation with probes and removal of corrupt flesh that is on them. 		 		 		 		 		 		 		 		 		 		 
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	 And it is known that capillary species are characterized by being exposed over the bone, washed, and anointed with tenth oil because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	 But in the treatment of fractures, first consider the patient's symptoms, and if you see through these symptoms that they indicate fear, such as vomiting from anger, tensing up, loss of consciousness, loss of voice, fainting, acute fever, discharge from the eyes and redness of them, similar to the symptoms in more severe conditions, then without a doubt he will not be cured.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	 And if you see unrelated symptoms, you can expect recovery; then begin the treatment of him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	 The cause is that if the patient comes to you at the beginning of their illness as it began and this is in the days of winter, then you must study the bone fracture before the fourteenth day according to all conditions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	 And if it is in the days of summer, then you should try to remove the bone within seven days, since after this time the flesh around the bone may become corrupt and the symptoms we have mentioned may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	 And if the fracture has already reached the flesh covering the brain, and it is with very small splinters and crushed pieces, then you must cut out the crushed and splintered parts, as I will tell you later.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	 And it is that you shave the patient's head where it is afflicted with disease, and uncover over the bone according to custom and practice as much as possible according to the shape of the disease, and let it be gentle on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	 And if it happens to you that you detect bone, blood flow, or pus overflowing, then you should oppose the area with water as needed. It is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil, and make the wound rest until the pus subsides and you are sure there is no bleeding; then begin with the scraping of the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	 And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And the first method is that you cut the bone with a thin knife like this, and this is its shape: Then you administer another knife, this one slightly wider than the previous one; and this is its shape:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	 And then administer the widest knife of the three.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	 And it is necessary that you have a diverse number of knives, some of which are wider than others, and some are shorter than the others, and they should be very sharp at their tips, and they should be made of Indian iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	 And use them gently with ease in striking over the scissors, so that you do not hit the head and hurt him.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	 And if the bone is hard and strong, then it is necessary to drill a hole in its front before you administer the scissors with the burrs, which are called non-penetrating burrs.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	 And they are not named this way only because those do not penetrate to the end of the bone from that which is nearby, for on the burr there is a rounded edge or margin beyond its sharp tip similar to a small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	 And it is convenient that you take a large number of these burrs, each suitable for the thickness of each bone, until you have all the bones of the skull with sharp tips, in quantity and length according to the thickness of this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	 And this is the manner of three types of burrs: The quality of drilling into the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the burr on the bone and revolve it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then remove the burr to another place, and put it in such a way that all around it pulls out the quantity of the thickness of the saw or surrounding it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	 And then make an incision with the scalpel between each bone, making it as subtle and light as possible, as we have said, until you remove the bone, either with your hand or some other tool prepared for this purpose, such as tweezers and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	 And it is necessary that you be very careful that the scalpel does not touch any vital organ.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	 And then, once you have separated the bone from any attached vital organ and extracted it, you should scrape and smooth the surface of the bone with another instrument similar to a scalpel, but one that is thinner and more subtle than other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	 And if any small fragments or splinters of bone remain, take them out with ease using the appropriate tool for this purpose; then heal the wound with linen and ointments as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	 And another method of operation is light and far from fear, which Galen calls praiseworthy; and here are his words on the subject: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and obvious. Once you have discovered that part and placed beneath it the tip of this gentle and cheerful scalpel, which has this form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	 Here's my best attempt to translate the given sentence into English:
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	 Certainly! Let's translate the given text into English line by line:
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	 Mays in each of the other small fractures, both capillary and subtle, it is necessary to administer care according to what has been lost for its correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	 And this is the reason why [it] should not be treated the same as all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	 And we have written about this in our discussion on large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	 And if the skin is torn when you remove the bone, then take a cloth according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the orifice of the wound; and then take another folded or triple-folded cloth and soak it in wine and rose oil and place it on top of the first cloth, and do this as lightly as you can on that, so as not to burden the flesh; and then administer a plaster of white lead on top, and do not make it stronger than is necessary for the wound alone.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	 Leave it with this treatment for one day or two until you are sure that the abscess has been cauterized; and then remove it and then administer medicines which cause excessive dryness, such as flax seeds and powder of violets and of Aristolochia, and similar things to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	 And it is that you make from these medicines a powder to be sprinkled over the wound as they are dry; and generally, administer to him all medicine whose property it is to soak up and not sting.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	 And be careful according to your skill that the wound in your care is clean; and there should not be any foolishness of ointment or other; nor let you allow virulence to increase in it; for when it is attached to the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts that part and poisons it, and an evil malignancy occurs upon the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	 And it occurs in the cavity of the skull, when from it the bone is softened and especially when its care is neglected, and there is blackness on its surface; and therefore consider if these accidents occur to the patient, you will know that it is pernicious without any doubt.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	 And if there is no blackness except from the medicine that is placed on it, and it is in the power of that medicine to cause that blackness, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and with those linens wrap a cloth, and then place that over the cavity; and then care for it with the specified medicines until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	 Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	 Of the restoration of the nose when it is cut off.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	 Know that the nose is not cut but rather split into two main parts simultaneously, or one of those parts occasionally, because in it there are two bones, whereas the lower part is cartilaginous and is not cut, and no harm comes to it except for roughness, crookedness, and narrowing.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	 However, if one of the two parts is cut, then you must insert your little finger into the patient's nose, and with your index finger inside and your thumb outside, reduce the fracture until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	 And do this easily, being careful not to cause pain to the patient during your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	 And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger does not reach it, then it should be reduced with the tip of a small stick.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	 And if the fracture is in both parts, then you should do the same thing.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	 And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, you should wait for the swelling to subside on the seventh or tenth day.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	 And then insert a piece of linen cloth into the tip of the nose, if the break is in one place, or two pieces of cloth, if the break is in two places, and let it be in the larger piece of such a quantity that it fills the hole in the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	 And some of the ancient restorers say that the pieces should be wrapped in wool and changed every day, but I have not seen this; it is necessary for the piece to be wrapped in egg white mixed with powdered chalk; and then leave the piece until the bone is set and the cartilage is hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	 And sometimes it is necessary to insert into the nose, instead of a piece of cloth, a pen of oak wrapped in linen; and this is if the nose fracture is more severe and the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	 And for this reason it is not necessary for you; and if you want to, do that, and if you want to, use pieces of cloth.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	 And if at another time a hot abscess occurs, bandage the nose with wax or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	 But if a hot abscess does not occur, then it is necessary to bandage that part from the outside with sesame flour and powdered ivy mixed with egg white; and then place over it a linen cloth, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	 Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence:
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	 And if a wound occurs inside the nose, then it is necessary to cure that with hot compresses and administer lead cannulae until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	 Chapter IV
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	 On restoring the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	 When the jaw has been broken and the fracture is not due to a wound, consider then if the fracture is only on the outside, and it is not broken in two but bent at the inner parts; then its treatment is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	 And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then you should insert the aforementioned index finger of the right hand; and with that you should push the swelling of the fracture inside to the outer parts, with your other hand on the outer part of the bone; with that you should evenly reduce it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	 And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension of both parts according to correctness until it is possible for them to be joined together.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	 And if there is a dislocation of the teeth, then strengthen those that you expect to remain with gold or silver thread or silk; and then place wax on the broken jaw, and then place a double cloth over it, and place a large star-shaped bandage or a sole bandage the length of the jaw; and then bind it above in such a way that the binding is appropriate and the application is suitable, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	 And command the patient to rest and remain calm, and hold back their food from excessive eating.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	 And if you think that the figure has already been altered in some way, then cut and remove it on the third day; and then rectify what has been altered in the patient and apply a plaster made of powdered mallow, egg white, or sesame flour, after you have removed the covering from them, and place wool over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	 Then, when that plaster is attached and adjusted to the patient, and the bone's position has not been altered, leave it there, do not remove it until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; for many times this fracture is healed in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	 And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said many times before in the patient's sedation until they are healed, and that abscess is removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	 And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or splinters, then you should be skillful in removing those splinters with what is convenient for the removal of those instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	 And if the wound's opening is narrow, then you should widen it using a surgical instrument called a fleubotomi according to the extent of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	 And immediately after you have removed those shards, and if nothing remains, then you should close the wound's opening if it is wide; otherwise, place one of the appropriate plasters on it and let it heal.
Capitol .v.	 Chapter 5
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	 On restoring the furcula (wishbone) when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	 Often, the furcula breaks at the division of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	 For it is broken, separated, or divided into two parts without fragments; and its restoration is easy; or it happens that there are fragments in it, and its restoration is difficult; or the fracture has a wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	 And the operation in this case, when the fracture is without a wound, is to have two assistants present, so that one holds and follows the broken furcula, and the other extends the neck toward that division. ️
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	 And immediately splint the fracture with the aforementioned ties until its shape is restored as needed, ensuring there is neither prominence nor concavity in it.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	 And if you need more extension, then place a splint under the patient's throat made of cloth or wool, and let its size be according to your necessity; extend and raise the collarbone and cut the splint with your hand until you have splinted the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	 And if you cannot pull the end of the collarbone out to the sides, because it has reached the ribs, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back with a pillow under their neck of medium size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	 And the assistant should press on the patient's neck to the sides until the bone of the collarbone is raised and returns to its place in the chest, then you correct the fracture and splint it with the aforementioned ties.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	 But if you feel shards of the collarbone and they are protruding, then it is necessary to cut over them and remove those shards with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And if it is stuck in the bone, then you should make an incision on it with one of the knives that you have prepared for this purpose, after placing under the collarbone the instrument which serves to lift; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and its shape is as follows:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	 And it should be like a cup whose concavity is this; and its length should be according to what you need from it, depending on the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	 But its length should be according to what is possible for the operation; it should have two ends like this, and one end should be wide while the other should be narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	 And if the opening of the wound which you have cut when you extracted the arrow from the bone is wide, and you are sure that there will be no suppuration, then you sew the two lips of the wound together with a stitch.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	 And if the opening is small, or you fear that there will be no suppuration, then you fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the incision in the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	 And if there is suppuration, then you pour vinegar, oil and wine over a cloth, and place it on top of that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	 But the constriction of the bone when there is no wound or section, is that you place a plaster made of flour of millet with egg white on it, and then place a stopper over it, and then place the sphere under the tip of it, if you need it, and then take a bandage, which is called by the Saracens "mot longua", and its length should be one palm or thereabouts; and then place double powders on the stopper and the plaster; and then take a thin wooden strip whose length is three fingers and similarly in length; and then wrap that in cloth, and then wrap that cloth with the strip around the fracture site; and then place bandages as it is wrapped, and roll it over his neck and under the tip of him, and reduce it on all sides, and whenever the constriction of the fracture with constriction descends, and this is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	 And all this is to be done without the ligature on top of the broken bone being too tight; and for this reason you must see the patient every day, because when the bandage becomes softened or you see that the ligature has become loose, then you should correct this and strengthen the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	 And then place the patient's pillow under their head, and put a small cushion under the patient's feet at night; this way, with that, the helper's arms are lifted off the patient's side, and thus the fracture of the collarbone is raised by the muscle being elevated; or have the patient's arm tied to the bedpost.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	 And do not untie the bandage unless you notice swelling or pus in that place within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	 And then renew the poultice if you have seen that face become like this, and adjust it in the stricture and restore that, and leave until the fracture of the collarbone is restored and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	 And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	 Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	 Of the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	 Based on the context provided and the similarity of the language to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation:
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	 And therefore, when the place is broken — and it is broken in the middle of the body — and it is only known by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, forcefully prepare it and reduce it back to its natural shape using all possible ingenuity.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	 And then place powder of ground alum mixed with egg white and cover it with a cloth; and then place on him a double-layered wool blanket; and then place on him a thin wooden board according to the amount of space needed, or perhaps a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	 But if the board is concave in some parts of the splint, then you should fill that concavity with a cloth, and then adjust the board to make it level.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	 And then strengthen it on top with a long bandage wrapped tightly and firmly with the board, so that it is not moved from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	 And examine the bandage every day; and whenever it is softened, bind another time and strengthen and straighten the board if it has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	 And warn the patient to lie on his side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	 And the splint is restored in 20 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	 And so when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and know for certain that this pertains to the bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	 And if you proceed from the bone and place a ligature underneath, then you cut over it, remove it, and act as we have said regarding the breaking of the furcula, of an abscess, cauterize if something happens here.
Capitol .vii.	 Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	 On the restoration of a broken foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	 The foot sometimes breaks in the middle part of it and this is delayed; but the ends of it move apart, which are crushed and broken up.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	 And the accidents of it when it is broken in the middle part are that it inclines towards the interior parts and great pain occurs, and difficulty in breathing, coughing, a strong fever, and vomiting blood; and this is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	 And the restoration of it is that the patient be placed supine on their back, and a cushion be placed between their shoulders; and then press firmly on their muscles, and align their ribs with the hands of two assistants, and be subtle in the operation of it and in the reduction according to all possible and necessary methods, until the shape of the bone returns as it should.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	 Here's the line-by-line translation of the given text:
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	 And if the necessity provokes the draining of that which causes corruption or putrefaction, or pain, or an abscess that occurs in that place, then you cut and dissect it, and remove the poultice and correct what happens there with the manner of healing it; and then return the poultice if it is necessary for the surface; and tighten it to the patient until they are healed.
Capitol .viii.	 **Capítulo VIII.**
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	 **Sobre la restauración de las costillas cuando están rotas.**
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	 Sé que la fractura de las costillas generalmente ocurre solo en áreas grandes, como la espalda; y en las extremidades de sus divisiones frontales, no se produce dolor a menos que estén dañadas, ya que son cartilaginosas.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	 Y el conocimiento de ello no está oculto al sentido común a través de las preguntas dirigidas a él.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	 Y la restauración debe realizarse así: cierre las fracturas con los dedos de la manera más posible hasta que se selle, y luego aplique una venda y fortalece los huesos rotos con una lámina, si es necesario.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	 Y si la fractura de las costillas se desvía hacia adentro, entonces el paciente experimentará un dolor intenso y agudo, como el que sufre alguien con pleuritis, porque los huesos perforan el tejido; y también le será difícil respirar, toser y vomitar sangre; y este caso es difícil de curar.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	 And already the Ancients were ingenious with these words.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	 And of them it is said: it is necessary to place food on the patient that causes inflammation and gas production, so that the stomach is inflated and stretched, and the fracture is pushed outward.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	 But we would advise against this because it may easily cause the formation of an abscess, if not careful; and if it has already happened, then it will help to do so.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	 And some of them say that it should be placed on the abdomen and sucked with force; this seems reasonable, but however, it is feared that the suction will draw the excess to the site due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	 And some of them say: it is necessary that the site be covered with wool already soaked in cauterizing oil, and pulp placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the bandage is equal when you wrap it according to its roundness; and then treat the patient with a diet and medicine for pleurisy.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	 And if the patient experiences severe pain that cannot be endured, and the bones pierce the flesh with a tooth-like puncture, fear for the patient; then it is necessary to make an incision on the site, expose the broken rib, and place over it the instrument that preserves the ciphac (previously mentioned), which cuts the bone easily and removes it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	 And then, approximately (we should) close the two lips of the wound. If it is large, we use stitches, and we treat it with plasters until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	 And if an abscess occurs inside, then you should cut (it) and insert poultices in rose oil and place (them) over the area, and let the patient be cured with what is appropriate for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	 And let him be laid on his back on the side where he sleeps, until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	 Chapter IX
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	 On the restoration of a broken vertebra of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	 Sometimes it happens that there is a fracture in the bones of the neck, and later (it happens) to their attrition, and similarly to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	 And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider, because if you see their hands softened and stunned and dead and he cannot move those nor extend nor strengthen those, and when you press those with your fingers or prick them with a needle and there is no pain in those, then you should know that it is not healed, and in the same way it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	 And if he has a bad sensation and feels constriction with the words and punctures, then you should know that the bone's nape is saved and that the patient will recover with care.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	 And if you see on the back of the neck something similar to this and you want to know whether it will be healed or not, then observe his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	 Then if you see that they are already softened, apply to them what has been applied to the hands, and then when he lies on his back, there will be wind and defecation without his will, and sometimes he is turned over on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and therefore do not try to cure him.  (This passage seems to describe symptoms of paralysis or stroke.)
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	 However, if none of the above-mentioned causes occur, then the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	 And the treatment for it is that you pierce towards the suppuration of the aposteme (abscess) with a heated needle, placing over the afflicted spine oil or rosemary alone, or with the juice of houseleeks (sempreiviva); place this on it several times a day until the abscess has drained.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	 Then place one of the comforting and strengthening plasters, and bind it firmly over that area; and instruct the patient to rest and be calm, and not to sleep on the side where they feel pain until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	 Here's the translation of the provided sentence:
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	 And if you feel broken bones in the patient, then press on that area, remove it (possibly referring to splinters or foreign objects), and treat the wound with the remedy prescribed until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	 **Chapter X.**
De restauracio de la ancha.	 **On the treatment of the spleen.**
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	 **The bones of the spleen are often broken, and if they do break, the fracture is only in their extremities and extends along their length, bending towards the inside; and the patient experiences pain in that area and a puncture, and the leg becomes numb when it is fractured.**
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	 **And to treat it, you should place your hand over the broken area until it conforms to its natural shape.**
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	 **And if the fracture is only in the extremity, then you should splint it according to what appears suitable for evenness until it returns to its natural shape.**
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	 **However, if the fracture is along the length and bends towards the inside, then you should have the patient lie on their back until you are ready to treat that fracture.**
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	 **And then when you have splinted it, apply plasters to it, and next place a wooden or leather bandage over it, binding it tightly so that you do not fear the fracture will puncture through or the bandage will slip off.**
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	 And fill the cavity with water that enters up to where it takes the stricture equally, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	 But if you notice a pustule, then cease from extending it and its restoration until the pustule is subsided. Place water on it that sedates it as described before; then return to the patient's restoration, and strengthen it in the manner required.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	 And if you find a fracture or broken bones, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	 Chapter XI
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	 On the restoration of the broken thumb.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	 The thumb is what is between the elbow and the shoulder joint.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	 And if it is broken, then its restoration is done in one of two ways. One way is that you take a flat dowel of medium thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	 And at both ends there are ligaments attached, and then it should be suspended from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	 And the patient should sit on a chair, and then he throws out his broken arm over the dowel until it reaches the middle of the arm, where the curvature of the dowel is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	 Based on the provided context and the similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	 Here's the translation of the provided sentence:
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	 And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen on the break with one ligature and on that with another ligature, and each of the two assistants extends to their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	 And therefore if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then half of the ligature should be placed above the kneecap and the other half below the fracture towards the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	 And similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow, then the ligature should be placed on that spot and on that elbow.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	 Tie it with ease and without strain, and when it is tied according to what is needed and properly applied, then strengthen it if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	 But if an abscess occurs, then leave the bandage in place for seven days, and place on it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess subsides, and then you can strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	 And the way to strengthen that is to place a plaster on the fracture, and then wrap a bandage of clean cloth over the plaster; and then fasten the arm on that support, and place your open hand on its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	 And place a cloth and strengthen over the supports the arms so that the arm is in its place of stars, if there are no obstacles or broken bones.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	 And then use stars.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	 And place over the fracture that star which is more broad and stronger than the other stars; and place between each star the thickness of a finger, and let the length of the stars be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	 And then strengthen over the stars with the strap that was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	 And make sure your strap over the site of the fracture is tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	 And the longer the break, the narrower should be the strap.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	 Therefore, if you see that the arrangement of the stars and the strap is done as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	 But if you fear an abscess forming, then leave the strap and the stars in place for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	 And consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that swelling or inflammation does not occur at the site; or it is prohibited that food reaches the member due to excessive tightness of the strap; and therefore correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	 If you are confident that there is no cause for this (condition), then do not remove the bandage until after three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	 And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands should be placed on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	 And place on the injured limb a full meal of wool equally, and beware at all times during the night or day that the shape of the broken limb is not distorted or the ligament softened, so correct this with all your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	 And feed the patient according to the order that we have mentioned before, so that the food is light at first until the strength begins to return; then it is necessary to make the food of the patient heavier.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	 Because it is customary for the limb and leg to be strengthened in forty days; then they should be unbound, and a bath should be given, and the limb should be treated with ointments that correct this.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	 And if the break is rough and jagged, then do not unbind that limb and the splints until after one day or two months.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	 Of the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	 Based on the context and similarities to modern Romance languages, here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	 And if the larger or smaller splint is broken very lightly, they are usually fractured together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	 And when the small splint is broken above, its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	 And when it is broken below, the fracture is bad, and the healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	 And even worse than that is when two bones are broken at once.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	 Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small splint above, it is necessary for the doctor to make a slight extension with ease until it is healed.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	 But if it is the larger splint that is broken, then one must make a more forceful extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	 And if both splints are broken together, then you should apply the traction much stronger.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	 And it is necessary that you place your hand for the restoration and the extension lies on a cushion, and the palm of the hand should be above the parts, more than all other things, and the auricular bone should be lower than the others, and let the patient lie on a soft pillow.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	 And there should be a cushion in front of him at the height or level of his chest, so that the patient does not encounter difficulty.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	 And then another minister extends the arm from the affected side, placing his hand or a bandage on it, and another minister does the same above him.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	 And then the doctor wraps the bones until they are returned to their proper form.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	 And if there are splinters in the bone, then you must perforate everything until it is completely removed from its place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	 And if a splinter is separated and touches the bone and it is not within your hope to restore it, then you cut it off and remove it in the manner we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	 But if the fracture is with a wound, I have already written about that in a special chapter, and so take care of it accordingly.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	 And if an abscess appears at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with a bandage made of rose oil and white wax, which is neither too thick nor too thin, and strengthen the cloth over it with a subtle tightness until the abscess subsides; then remove the bandage and place a prepared paste of powdered chalk mixed with egg white on it, and then place scales; and let the scale placed on that fracture be broader and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	 And know that the number of stars on the arm refers to the major arrangements, whether it is a fracture in one bone or in two bones at once.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	 And place your constricting device over the site of the fracture with great strength and vigor. When the constriction is higher or lower on the break, apply the restriction a little more gently, as was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	 And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough. The thread used to bind it should be neither too fine nor too coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	 And examine the limb and the bandage every few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	 And if any swelling occurs that requires correction, as soon as it happens to the limb, you should immediately immerse the limb in hot water until the swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	 And let the limb rest without constraint until it is at ease, and then reapply the bandage.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	 And if the restriction has been softened and the bone has healed and appears to be strong, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	 And consider if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the member due to an excess of stricture. For then you should soften it slightly and leave it for some days until nourishment reaches it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	 But if the patient does not experience any of the causes we mentioned, then it is not necessary to release him for about 20 days or around that time.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	 And the patient's hand should also be suspended due to its power of agitated movements, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	 And know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or forty-two days, or rather lightly in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the complexions and the dispositions of the power.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter XIII
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	 On the restoration of a finger fracture of the hand and similar things.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	 Know that in the fingers of the hand and in the toes of the feet, it often happens that there is a fracture and nothing but bruising occurs to them.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	 And when there is a fracture or bruising in the hand, it is then necessary for the patient to lie on his back and before him let a cushion be placed according to its size, and then place the hand of the patient on it stretched out.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	 And then the minister extends the broken bones, and the doctor binds them together until they are properly healed with a good bandage.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	 And then it is necessary to place a plaster and some padding there, otherwise a boil may form; and then place a steel plate on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	 But if the fracture is in the finger joints, you must press the palm of the hand, and then make a pad similar to a ball from cloth, and tell the patient to hold that with their broken hand; then it should be bandaged with a long piece of cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	 And the steel plate should be made of leather wrapped in cloth, so that the leather is applied to the palm; and hold it as tightly as necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	 But if the fracture is in the outer joints, then it is necessary to place one steel plate on top and another on the inner side of the palm, so that the hand remains open and straight; and then bind the splint, as the hand is wrapped with the mentioned bandages.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	 And if there is a fracture in one of the fingers, then if it is a toe, it should be bandaged as necessary and then held to the palm, and if you wish, place a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not misaligned.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	 This sentence appears to describe a medical procedure for treating a fracture in the toes. Let's break it down line by line:
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	 Certainly! Let's translate the given sentence line by line:
Capitol .xiv.	 Capitulo XIV (Chapter Fourteen)
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	 On the restoration of a broken thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	 The thigh bone, when broken, is known by sensation according to its displacement in the front and upper parts.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	 The restoration of it is done thus: the ligaments are tightened above the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient should lie on their stomach and face down.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	 And then the servant extends all the ligaments to their proper place according to the quality [of the break], when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	 However, if it is broken at the head of the thigh, then the ligament should be close to the knee in the direction of the tendon, so that the extension can take place on its own, and the other ligaments below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	 Similarly, if the break is at the knee, then the ligament should be made close to the knee, and the extension should be in the parts below it.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	 And then the physician should unite the bones with both his hands until he reduces them according to their natural appearance and the bone is united by a good union; in that case, it is necessary to apply a plaster and binding, otherwise an abscess may occur in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	 But if there is an abscess in the patient, then leave it alone for several days until the abscess has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	 The stricture of the patient should be done as follows: it is necessary to wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, folding it two or three times, and removing excess material; then wrap the leg until it reaches the ankle and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	 Then insert a long needle between the thigh and the leg close to the bone, at the partitions below, so that the ends of the needle come out from the higher partition of the two parts; then wrap what is left over from the bandage around the leg and the thigh.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	 Then place a splint on the thigh in the place of that fracture, and place one end of it against the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	 Then fill the empty spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth, so that the stricture is made firm.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	 Then begin with a strong binding in the middle of the place of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you move further away from the place of the fracture, let your binding be smaller, lighter, and moister.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	 Here's the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	 And then release the structure on that part so that it is such that corruption or abscess does not occur in the member, nor inflammation and similar conditions; and if any of these things happen, then beware of being removed from him, and correct what happens very closely, according to what we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	 But if the pressure is in the bone where it hurts, then you should splint that part as much as possible; and if not, put a poultice on it and leave it there, and treat it with the remedy mentioned above until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	 And sometimes this fracture of the ribs or other bones is reduced by being pulled into place, as we have said in [the section on] help and the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	 But however, in the restoration of it done in this manner, no limp occurs in the patient; and if it is restored alone or another leg is applied to it, then it is necessary that he limps on the side from which [the injury] always occurs.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	 And know that the rib is strengthened in 40 days or a little more or less, and all this is according to the diversity of the complexions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	 Given that we're dealing with a medieval medical treatise, I would guess that "Capitol .xv." refers to Chapter XV or Section XV of the text. The Roman numeral "XV" corresponds to the number 15 in modern notation.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	 About the restoration of a broken rib.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	 Know that a fracture of the rib of the tooth often takes time to heal, but it happens more quickly with careful attention and care.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	 However, if it is a fracture, then it is only a fissure or crack in its parts, which can be with or without pain, and everything depends on the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	 And its restoration is such that what is broken from its parts should be glued together with the aforementioned, until it is joined and united as much as possible by balance, ease of handling, and skillful work.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	 Then place a plaster over it and place a round piece of wood on top if you need to; and strengthen it with bindings as appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	 And then consider all the recommendations we have given for other fractures, such as avoiding inflammation and similar issues, so that you may prevent any accident from occurring until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter XVI
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	 About the restoration of a broken thigh.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	 Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the femur; the other is thin and is called the patella.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	 And it happens with each of the types of fracture that occur in the two bones of the arm; and because of this, its restoration is done similarly to the restoration of the arm itself, and the operation for it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	 And if two bones are broken at the same time, the leg becomes completely shattered.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	 And if a finer bone is broken, the leg becomes shattered in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	 And if a thicker bone is broken, it should be pushed back into place; this is one of the things you are not familiar with.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	 Then administer extension and alignment and bandaging of the splints in the same way.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	 However, it is necessary that if the leg fracture has many fragments, the extension should be less and lighter, and you should proceed with your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	 And in the leg there is one operation similar to that of the arm, and it is when you join the splints and complete all of your operations; then you will take pieces of pine wood which are placed under the soles, which are usually made from palm branches; choose those with small thickness, not too thick, and their length should be according to the length of the leg, and inserted from the inside towards the bottom.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	 And then wrap each leg in two bandages according to their length, placing one on the upper part of one thigh and the other on the lower part of the other thigh, and they should be tightly wound down to the lowest part of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	 And then bind the two shins in three places at both ends and the middle, for with this binding the leg is prevented from bending to the right or left, and it remains in a good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	 And now administer a splint of wood according to the length of the leg, and place it on the leg so that it may be immobilized.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	 And it is especially important that you do this in case of a fracture, which is properly called a wound in this context.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	 And then consider the leg each day and examine it carefully for any signs of infection or swelling, or other similar causes; and if any such cause appears, then apply a remedy to it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	 Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	 On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	 The ankle does not always fracture completely; rather, the bones of the foot sometimes fracture; and the toes of the foot rarely fracture, but only bruise in most cases due to their position.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	 And if the bones of the foot seem to be broken and you notice those bones rising above the others, then place the patient's foot on a prepared surface as if they were walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	 And then place one foot on what is raised from those bones, and then step on them, press down, and squeeze until they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	 And then place a poultice and dressing on top, and place underneath the sole of the foot a small board with two flat heads.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	 And then strengthen that with the foot using a descending traction, since you have wrapped it with cloth and other materials as needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	 And after three or four days have passed, then you can unbind it, for you will find the bones pressed together, or displaced, or dislocated, and the operation on them is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	 But if some are dislocated, then restore those and squeeze them together as I have instructed you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	 And then place a splint on the dislocated toe according to its length and a little wider than it; and place this board under the foot as instructed, and strengthen it with proper traction.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	 "But if the bone fracture involves two or three or more bones, then place a splint of corresponding size on each finger, wrapped in linen cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, standing one of the table legs through the sole of the foot so that it has good support.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	 "And it is important for you to remember not to overlook any of the causes mentioned to you in other cases of fractures; and prepare yourself for all accidents with what is necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	 "Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	 "On the Fracture of the Female Hip and Pelvis, and the Male Penis and Testicles.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	 "When the female hip is broken, have that woman lie in a seated position, and then incline her slightly forward at the waist, and she should be supported from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	 "And then the midwife should fill the hip with cotton, and it should be done in her hip as if it were a spoon; and then the woman should be shaken, and raise her little by little from behind, because all this is forgotten until it is in front of the hip bone as if in a spoon and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	 And then place a pillow on their back, and when they want to urinate, help them easily and quickly, and then return and place the pillow as it was at the beginning, and then return to their first pillow.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	 And do this for seven days or thereabouts, because by then they will be restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	 And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and place a reed cannula on the opening of it; then insert the entire bladder into the patient's vagina, and then blow into the cannula with all your strength until the bladder is inflated inside the vagina, for this will cause the dislocation to return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	 And then it should be filled with wine and kept there for several days as we have recommended, until the patient is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	 And when the bone of a man's or woman's thigh is broken, then administer for its restoration and union that which we have recommended for the hipbone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	 And what is correct in these cases is not hidden from those who are skilled and practiced, especially if someone knows and understands this my book well; for that fracture indicates to you the major dispositions of the correct way in its restoration and consolidation, so understand it well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	 In the case of a man's penis being caught (trapped), he should take a garlic clove and insert it into the penis; then he should place a cloth covering over him and let it be wrapped, and afterwards it should be left for three days or around that time, and it will be cured.
Capitol .xix.	 Chapter XIX
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	 On the healing of bone fractures when they are painful.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	 It is advisable for one who has suffered a painful fracture, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh or shinbone, or similar to it, that you bleed him and perform phlebotomy on him immediately if the conditions for phlebotomy are favorable to you or testify to this as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	 And if the wound continues to bleed, then you must ensure that you retain it (the blood) by sprinkling powdered white lead over it, unless there is another reason present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	 And then immediately begin to set the fracture on that same day, and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	 But if an abscess occurs, then you should delay the setting of it until the ninth day, when the abscess has subsided. And do not approach it on the third or fourth day, because you will cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	 If the bone is broken and protruding over the knee joint, then it is necessary to drill into it and smooth it with your hands gently and minimally.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	 However, if the extension is not ready and the alignment of the bones with your hands is not successful, then you should reduce it using this instrument; and it is an instrument made of iron, whose length is seven or eight digits, and its width is according to the size of the wound; and for this reason, it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these instruments according to what is needed in the cure for any type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	 And it should be round and have little roughness, so that it does not bend during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	 And it should have a sharp tip with a margin on its edges; and the upper part of it should be widening, and the middle part should be narrowing towards the end.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	 And this is what it looks like:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	 And in Greek, it is called "labre volentz atelarem," which means small spatula.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	 Therefore, the sharp end should be raised above the protruding bone's tip.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	 And you push him back once until he returns to his senses and is calmed by some means.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	 And therefore you should strive to bring the ends of the fracture together, and if the broken end is thin and does not take the instrument well, then it is necessary for you to insert the end of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	 But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have recommended, then insert it with whatever is suitable among the inserters which we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in any manner that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	 And then file away what remains on the bone of roughness and small splinters.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	 And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient feels a violent pain in the tooth, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what you would confer on the patient great benefit.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	 When you have completed the restoration that you do to the bone, then immediately immerse a cloth in black stiptic vinegar, especially if it is summer, and do not place wax or any other substance containing oil on the wound, so that it does not cause inflammation and corruption in him.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	 And then administer herbs at the time of your compliment of the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can incise it with forceps and use dressings according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	 And be careful not to strain the wound with the fracture, for many foolish doctors have done this and caused death or severe illness in their patients, which is a mistake.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	 And if the constriction is light, make it soft, unlike the constrictions of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	 And if the wound is large or severe, and you fear that bad accidents may occur as we have mentioned, and you feel pain in the area, then it is not appropriate to place herbs on it; instead, apply a dressing of hard cloth to the area and strengthen it with them.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	 And when after one or two days the wound begins to heal and a scab forms on it, then remove the cloth that you had placed over it with vinegar, and then administer clay, ointments with which according to our custom we treat wounds, such as tetrapharmacon ointment and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	 And you should ensure that the bandage is removed and examine the wound each morning and evening until it is healed and secure, and it is important that the limb be prepared in such a way that the poison runs out of it to the adjacent areas with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	 If many days have passed and the wound is neither healed nor separated from his arm, then know that here are the beginnings of little worms, for which it is necessary to probe the wound with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	 And of those beginnings, those that are separate and extruded, those that are not separated and putrefy the limb and cause pain, you should endeavor to cut them out as much as possible for yourself.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	 And if you see pus or yellow liquid in the wound, it is indicative of flesh-eating disease or another type of corruption and putrefaction, then you should apply one of those things that are suitable for him from the treatment that was mentioned earlier in its own chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	 And on this matter, in which I must conclude my discourse and you should present your opinion: when the bone is broken, it protrudes from the limb like the bones of the chest and ribs and similar to those of large members, and do not attempt extraction from it, nor its removal, because many times death occurs due to this; having left it alone until it rots, for it will fall out by itself within about 20 or 30 days; then cure the wound if you see fit, and if not leave it.
Capitol .xx.	 Capítulo 20 (Chapter 20)
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	 About the treatment of nodes that occur due to a previous fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	 This node often occurs in the process of healing a fracture, especially near the joints, and it affects the shape of the limb; it also strongly prevents the limb from functioning naturally.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	 Therefore, consider if the node is recent and administer to it those medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, henbane, hemlock, crabs' eyes, oak bark, and the like; so that you take some or all of these and mix them with vinegar, egg white, or vinegar, and apply this mixture to the node on a piece of wool cloth, securing it well with a tight bandage.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	 Allow the dressing to remain in place for several days without removing it; then remove it and apply another, continuing this process until the node has diminished; or, as an alternative, place a lead sheet over the affected area, because lead has the property of reducing all swelling in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	 However, if the node has already hardened and is tightly attached, and it is necessary to remove it promptly, then cut through its most elevated part, and excise any excess or protruding flesh, or shave it with razors until it has diminished; and treat the wound until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	 Capítulo 21
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	 Capítulo 21: Sobre la restauración de fracturas Cuando se ha restaurado una fractura y el miembro está todavía débil y frágil, sigue su propia naturaleza.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	 Capítulo 21: Sobre la restauración de fracturas Cuando una fractura ósea se ha restaurado y el miembro aún permanece débil y frágil, esto no ocurre por ninguna razón específica sino por varias causas. Una de ellas es la excesiva solución del hueso roto y la unión incorrecta realizada; otra causa es el exceso de tensión en los ligamentos, lo que impide que el miembro reciba nutrición adecuadamente; también puede deberse al exceso de férulas o vendajes; o por movimientos inapropiados realizados en momentos no indicados; o por la falta de sangre en el cuerpo del paciente y su debilidad.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	 Capítulo 21: Sobre la restauración de fracturas El tratamiento para esto es dar al paciente alimentos y hacer que su corazón sea tierno hasta que la sangre se multiplique en él; administrar baños; y proporcionar alegría y diversión sobre el miembro.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	 Capítulo 21: Sobre la restauración de fracturas Luego, coloca una pomada sobre el miembro para que la pomada atraiga el flujo de nutrición, o continúa con vendajes húmedos con agua tibia hasta que la nutrición fluya y el miembro recupere su forma natural.
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	 About the treatment of fractured bones when they are set incorrectly, and you forbid the operation that is necessary.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	 When it happens to a member that has already been set, you should approach its healing from distortion and prominence of the bone fracture and swelling. This is due to the shape of the member, but nevertheless, the member is not prevented from its natural operation. Therefore, you should not accept the word of someone who thinks that member is newly fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	 However, there have been foolish physicians and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is highly blameworthy, causing great fear, the sign of which is deathly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	 But if the swelling and inflammation are recent, it is necessary to apply them with warm water in which softening herbs have been cooked, such as leaves of mallow and roots of this plant, and melilot, and similar ones; and let a plaster be made with a softening plaster such as well-made Dulcamara; or let it be taken powdered mucilage of mallow root and mixed with egg white or oil of rosemary, and let it be plastered with that; or let fat figs be taken and crushed with pigeon dung, and similar ones of the medicines that are named amermans consolidacio.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	 And sometimes it is resolved with persistent gentle friction using the wettest hands, and the movement of the limb should be administered in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	 But if the tortuosity has already advanced and is severe and has turned into stone and there is a necessity to cure it with iron, then it is necessary that the pus be on top and that the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and that which superfluously nodulates from that very same part with the bone with subtle scissors be cut, and facilitation be administered in that with solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter XXIII
De sermo en dislocacio.	 On Dislocation
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	 Dislocation is the displacement of any joint from its proper place, which prohibits movement, distorts the shape of the limb, and causes great pain and injuries in the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	 Therefore, when dislocation occurs, it is necessary to immediately pierce and reduce it, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the place becomes swollen and very difficult to reduce with water.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	 And for this reason it should not be moved or stretched during the time of swelling, because many times it causes spasm and severe pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	 When this happens, it is necessary for you to proceed with the bloodletting of the patient, and then allow the abscess to rest; and then wrap the limb with hot water and oil, and then reduce it gently.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	 And let every member be cured with the water of which the memory will come to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	 And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation as follows: from the highest part of the body to the lowest, in the same manner as for fractures.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 Chapter .24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	 On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	 If both jaws are dislocated at the same time and not immediately treated, the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are moved slightly from their places and become somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated to the point where they are softened at the joint, causing saliva to run from the patient's mouth so that he cannot close it, and his tongue is wrapped in his throat.  (This sentence may be a bit difficult to interpret due to the archaic language and medical terminology, but I hope this helps!)
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	 But when the dislocation is slight, it returns to its proper place by itself with little difficulty.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	 "But if the dislocation is complete and fully developed, then it should be gently reduced, and this should not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 "And let the attendant hold the head of the patient, and let the doctor insert his thumb into the space of the dislocated jaw inside the mouth of the patient, if the dislocation is on one side; or let him insert both thumbs at once, if the dislocation is on both sides. And let the others be outside with their hands, by which they should pull evenly; and command the patient to stop moving his jaws and let them go to each part; and the doctor should pull evenly and reinsert the jaw until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	 "And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer a warm water and oil mixture to facilitate the gentle reduction of both jaws, and do not delay the reduction of both jaws at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	 "And when they have returned and are even, and the patient's mouth is closed but not softened, then place a cloth soaked in wax and oil on those pulps, and it should be done gently with soft bandages; and thus it should be bound for ease with soft bands.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	 And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head resting between two pillows to prevent turning to the right or left; and do not force them to eat anything; have their food be finely chopped lion until such time that the pains have subsided and the jaws are relaxed, then let them eat whatever they want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	 And let this be administered with ease, and do not work the mouth opening for eating, drinking, or speaking until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	 And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some point and not returned to their places, then well-known fevers and persistent sweating occur, and it is easy for the patient's stomach to become swollen, and easily and vomit pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	 And when you see this, then know that it is fatal; and well-known is that one who experiences this dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter 25.  (In this context, "Capitol" is an archaic or medieval spelling of "Chapter.")
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	 Of the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and of the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	 The collarbone is not dislocated from the back inside due to its connection with the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated on the outside, and this is apparent by touch.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	 And the restoration of him is that the patient should lie on his back and extend his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	 And then press down firmly on the area with your palm, for it will return to its place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	 And then place a plaster and powder on it and bind it tightly.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	 But the extremity that follows the elbow and is connected to it is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and tied up as we have said and according to what you are capable of doing.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	 And then place a plaster, and powder, and a tourniquet, and instruct the patient to remain quiet and at rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	 And with this same method is reduced the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	 Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	 On reducing the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	 Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it may be dislocated at the attachment of the tendon to the lower attachment.  (This passage describes different types of muscle dislocations, with "titillic" referring to the tendon and "partida dejos" meaning the lower or distal attachment.)
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	 The second way is that it may be dislocated at the upper end of the muscle, and this happens rarely. And it is not dislocated at the back attachments through the shoulder; nor is it dislocated at the front attachments through the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	 And if it is dislocated and comes out of the joints, you should tickle it, especially in those areas where there is little flesh, it dislocates easily; but in those with more flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	 And if a strong blow strikes some men, and their muscle becomes inflamed with an acute abscess, it is believed that this has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	 Therefore, you should press on that area until you are sure of it, and then proceed with his treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	 And its dislocation is known when it is in the joints, because you should tickle it; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, for you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find a concavity at the head of the muscle, and when you tickle it, you should feel the touch of the head of the muscle like an egg, and the patient cannot move their hand to their ear, nor do anything more with all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	 If it is dislocated in the feet or knees, and you then find a clear touch, and it does not hide.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	 And from this dislocation, an easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	 Certainly! Let's translate the given text step by step:
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	 "But if, due to what we have said, the condition does not improve, and it is from the initial cause that the dislocation occurred many days ago, then it is necessary for the patient to be bathed in hot water and an embrocation that softens and relaxes should be administered, as if made with althea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be applied.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	 Here's a line-by-line translation of the given text:
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	 And if you want to, reduce it in this way: that you have a man present who is taller than the patient, and he stands on the opposite side of the bed, and he inserts his muscle between the patient's ribs and lifts the patient's chest up until the patient is suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient's hands out from under them, placing them at their sides.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	 But if the patient is lightweight, then another person should also be suspended with them, in order to make them heavier, because otherwise the dislocation may return quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 And it can also be reduced in another way: that is, a long pole should be placed on the ground with a rounded head, similar to a mortar's pestle, not too thick or thin, and then the patient should be placed on top of it; once cloths are placed under the patient's head, and the patient is standing according to the length of the pole, and then their hands are extended out to the sides, and their body is pulled strongly from the other side, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	 And if it is difficult to reduce him for all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this remedy: that you take a pole whose length is two arms long, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness decreases towards the head like this:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	 And now place linen cloths over the patient's head to prevent the wood from striking them.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	 And then place your hand under the patient's shoulder blades, and extend your arm or both arms over the beam within the shoulder blades, and tie the beam to the supports, the arms, and the ends of your hands.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	 Then place your arms on the ladder according to its height, and extend your hand under the shoulder blades, and let the other person be suspended from the other side, because the joint will soon enter.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	 And when the preparation for them is completed in whatever way possible, it is then necessary to place under their shoulder blades a woolen pad of equal size; and then apply a plaster prepared from powdered poppy seeds and egg whites over all the muscles, turning it around on top, and then bind the shoulder blades tightly with a bandage. And let the bandage be rolled onto the plaster, and their hand be fastened to their neck, and let it remain untouched for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	 And it is necessary to give the patient's food in small quantities until the limb is comforted, because it is easier for their healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	 Based on the provided context and the structure of the sentences, here's my best guess at translating the sentence:
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	 Certainly! Let's translate the provided sentence:
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	 Based on the pattern you've provided and the context of medieval medical texts, here's a line-by-line translation:
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	 "Regarding the dislocation that occurs at the feet and ankles or at the back of the joints, the reduction is done with traction and extension of the hands until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	 "And another stricture should be applied to that [area], and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	 "And if it happens that the member becomes heavy and slow to move, then the patient should use warm baths until the heaviness is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	 "Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	 "On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	 "Know that the shoulder joint is difficult to dislocate and likewise difficult to return; it can be dislocated in any direction, but most commonly forward from the back, and its dislocation cannot be hidden from you because it will be evident from the appearance or touch depending on how it has been dislocated. And when you set the dislocated shoulder with the arm, this is clearly indicated to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor can that muscle touch it.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	 "And it is necessary that you push and reduce the dislocation as soon as the swelling comes, for if it comes to the swelling, the reduction of it will be difficult, and it will not heal easily; and especially when it is in the back parts, because it is the worst of all other types of dislocations, and very painful, and many warm treatments can lead to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	 And the restoration of him, when it is possible to reduce it, is that his hand be extended with two hands, and his arms be spread out, and the physician's hands be on the elbows and below him, and he should press the joint with the fingers of both his hands at the same time, or with the edge of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	 But if the dislocation is at the shoulder joints in front, then return it so that you bend his hand with your hand, until it strikes the elbow with the edge of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	 And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer strong extension and very strong force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	 And two assistants should extend the arm, and hold it in that same position with two other assistants, so that it is not moved away from the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	 And then the arm should be turned in every direction, since it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around his hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	 And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint that [joint] with some oil so that this is one of the causes which aid in the lubrication of the joint and make it easier; and then press the joint with strong pressure until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	 And approximately for the reduction of it is necessary that a bandage be placed on which there is astringency and dryness with egg white, and it should be tightened with a strong cord, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	 And approximately it should be released; and if the joint is formed in its place, then release the bandage of him and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	 And if you see that the joint is not strengthened, then repeat the bandage and the binding, and leave it for some days until it is tightened; and then release it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	 But if there is a severe occurrence near the reduction of the joint, and his condition is restless, then administer moistening in baths and gentle friction, and coldness, until it is relieved; or place on the joint aloe, as it is for strong motion; and then bind it tightly, and leave it on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	 And then remove that, and put him in a bath; and when he emerges, then rub the joint with temperate friction, and then apply aloe again, as it is for motion, once, and the second time, and the third time,
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	 In the process of bathing, until it is cleansed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	 And if you wish, place a moist and scraped cowhide over that wound; and do this several times, because it is moist and reduces to its proper state.
Capitol .xxviii.	 Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	 About the treatment of dislocation in the wrist joint, which is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	 Sometimes the wrist of the hand is dislocated, and its reduction is easy, which is different from other joints. However, it is important that the reduction be done quickly in the hour in which it is dislocated, before the place becomes swollen or a swelling forms there.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	 The reduction of the dislocation is done by placing the patient's hand joint on a table and having them extend their hand, while the physician places his hand or palm on the prominent part of the joint and pushes it until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	 However, it is important to consider whether the palm has already been moved towards the back of the hand. If this is the case, let the patient place the back of their hand on a table in front of them for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is at the base of the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be entirely on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls on that prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	 And therefore, if it returns immediately, it is good; and if not, then strengthen it with a plaster that encourages the abscess to release and leave it; and do not repeat this, because if you do, neither you nor the patient can tolerate the reduction of pus that passes during the day.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	 But however, the joint remains according to its twisted nature; and if the patient feels no pain, except that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen anything; then know that the nerves are pinched or cut, and there is nothing wrong with him except that he should be strengthened with a cautery near the opening of it, and you will confer great benefit on him in this way.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	 Therefore, when the illness has returned, then place on him the plaster which we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; and then it should be removed and left, and the patient's hand should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	 But if the patient's movement is impeded and some heaviness occurs in him, then relieve it with warm water and some rubbing until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	 Chapter .29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	 About the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	 Sometimes these [conditions] are dislocated at every turn.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	 And when one of these [conditions] is dislocated to the back of the palm or the front of it, then hold the finger and press the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns [to its normal position].
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	 And then support the head of the finger and suspend it in such a way that the dislocated part is facing downwards, and leave it like this for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	 And then suspend it and extend it until it is straight in its own day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	 And when it is night, bind it according to that story, and do not stop unbinding it during the day and exercising with movements, and bind it again at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	 And do the same if it is dislocated to the front of the hand, and bind it to that part and perform the same first operation until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	 Similarly, do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	 Chapter .30
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	 On the treatment of spinal dislocation.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	 When complete dislocation occurs to any of the vertebrae in the back or neck, and many vertebrae are moved from their places, then there is no cure for that, because death comes to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	 And the sign of this is that the patient's bowel movement occurs without their control and they cannot hold it back; often many members of them or both legs, or both arms, or one of those are softened; or a vertebra has been displaced from its place, because many times it has been displaced and many times the removal of these is done in four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	 Therefore, that which was removed to the rear parts is named gelotizatio.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	 However, the treatment of this is that when you consider if the gelotizatio occurs in childhood, then there is no cure for it, nor is there any hope of healing it completely.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	 But for those that occur due to a fall or a blow or something similar, the Ancients have already spoken of the manners of treatment at length, from which the greatest profit comes; but I have already shortened it, because the little that is left out does not detract much from it, due to my closeness to my own understanding. With this explanation, I have presented and formulated it through various instruments, with which I will show and explain it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	 I say that in the case of gelotizatio that occurs in the front part of the feet, there is no ingenuity or cure for it; and similarly in the case where it is made at two laces.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	 And of those [ailments], only the one that occurs in the back is cured with what I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	 And the patient should be placed face up on a soft bed near a wall, and under him there should be a wet instrument to prevent his feet from being lifted.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	 And then place a straight stick in the ground at the head end of the bed, and another stick at the foot end of the bed under his feet.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	 And let one servant hold the stick and not fix it in a hole; and another servant should hold the other one accordingly.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 Then wrap a bandage around the patient's head and tie it securely under his chin; extend the end of the bandage to the stick at his head, and fasten it there; then strengthen another bandage over his hips and buttocks, and go between his thighs; then adjust all the bandages and fasten them on the other stick at his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	 Then let each servant extend the bandage to the end of the stick, and do not move the two sticks and the bandages from their places where they are fixed, but however, they should not be fixed as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	 And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or places [something] on that spot a table, and then adjusts his feet on the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	 But if it does not return this way, then take a table whose width or length is about three spans, and make a hole in the wall next to the patient so that the end of the table can fit into it.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	 Then place the majority of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and presses strongly until the spine is straightened and returns to its proper place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	 And if you wish, turn around the [device] that is reversed with your hand; and it is that you place yourself on the ground behind the patient's head at the end of two posts, the length of which should be one arm, and at the back of the head equally two posts; and let the distance between each post be one palm, and a hole has already been made in each post through which the turn can run, and each should be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	 And there is also a round post through which the turn runs, and it is turned in the two holes of the two posts.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	 And at the end of it there is an opening through which a rod has been formed, whose length is one handbreadth and it is wrapped around; and in the other two rods, it is similar to this one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	 And then strengthen the ties that you have tied on the patient's feet around the opening that is near their head, and the ties that you have tied on their thighs around the turn that is near their legs.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	 And then there should be one servant at each turn, who turns the turn with his hand, and the physician holds the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	 And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	 And after the spine has been returned and the place has been held, it is necessary to put on an astringent plaster with egg white, and then wool; and then place on top of the plaster a board whose width is three fingers or about that, and its length should be such that it covers the place of swelling, and over the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	 And then it should be tied with the tie that we have mentioned, and the patient should be fed with delicate food until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	 And if there remains any swelling in the place after the healing, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and cleanse with a prolonged diet, which we have recommended; and already in that place a lead sheet has been applied.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	 It seems like the text is discussing a medical condition related to the spine and bones. Let's break it down line by line:
Capitol .xxxi.	 "Chapter 31
De curacio de anca dislocada.	 About the care of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	 Know that the hip joint and the muscle joint should only be considered as dislocation, and not what happens to other joints with slight displacement or concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	 And the hip joint can be dislocated in four ways: either towards the inside parts, or towards the outside parts, or towards the front parts, or towards the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	 And it is most commonly dislocated inward, and less frequently forward or backward.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	 And the sign of its inward dislocation is that when you align the healthy leg with the patient's, it appears longer and the affected area is more prominent than on the healthy side. The patient cannot bend their affected foot towards the knee, and this is where a hard swelling forms, indicating that the head of the thigh bone has moved inward. 👉 "The sign of its inward dislocation is that when you align the healthy leg with the patient's, it appears longer and the affected area is more prominent than on the healthy side. The patient cannot bend their affected foot towards the knee, and this is where a hard swelling forms, indicating that the head of the thigh bone has moved inward.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	 And the sign of outward dislocation is that its symptoms are opposite to those mentioned above.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	 And the sign of that person to whom dislocation happens in the front parts is that he stretches his leg according to its natural state, but nevertheless without bending it painlessly, and if he tries to walk and cannot do so on the front parts; and his urine is retained and his testicles are swollen, and you should make him walk on the soles of his feet.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	 And the sign of that person to whom dislocation happens in the back parts is that he does not stretch his leg, nor can he bend it forward as much as he can bend his testicles, and his leg is shorter than the other, and his testicles are softened, and you should place the head of the hip in its proper place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	 However, the reduction of this type of dislocation is that you consider, if the dislocation is old and chronic, having already lasted for a long time, then when you administer the reduction to him, he will remain according to his disposition, in which case the treatment is not complete; and therefore, it is not necessary to perform any maneuvers.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	 However, in the case of recent dislocation and it is one of the four types of dislocation, then you should proceed to turn the joint and stretch it towards the inside and towards the outside, both to the right and left, for it returns easily and does not require any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	 Sure, here's a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	 And if the extension is from the inside of the elbow to the shoulder blade, or from behind to the back.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	 And let the extension be of all those [limbs] at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground with their body and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	 And this type of extension is common to all four [limbs].
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	 And if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then everything that we say about its own cure is necessary.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	 In the reduction of itself, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the inner parts, the patient must be placed on their back; and then place the bandages over the front of the chest in that place which is between the head of the chest and the place below the armpit; and then extend the bandage from the part of the armpit to the highest part of the shoulder blade.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	 And then another strong minister should take the arms of the patient and firmly grasp the thick part of the chest, and extend it to the outer parts with great force, because that returns it to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	 And this type is of easier cure with which this member is reduced than other types.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	 Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos los denols.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	 And let each of them be four times as long, and let the ailing leg be extended more than the other by two times.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	 And then have the patient suspended from the top of the pole, and let them be higher up; and let the length from the ground to them be two arm spans.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	 And then command a strong young man to press on the head of the cushion, and let another young man be suspended with the patient, and let the other young man forcefully press the cushion with strength, for the joint returns to its place swiftly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	 But in the proper reduction, when it is a dislocation that has moved outward, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back as we have recounted having gelbozitated; and let the bandage be tightly wrapped around the ailing leg specifically and around the feet of the patient.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	 And then two poles should be placed, one under the feet of the patient and the other under their head; and then appropriately sized poles should be placed in the middle of the bed, on which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being between their thighs, because you must ensure that the extension to the parts below is not disturbed.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	 And then each assistant should extend their part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	 Therefore, if it obeys the reversal, it will be very good; and if not, apply it firmly and as we have said in flexibility for the same result.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	 However, make sure that the patient lies flat on their back calmly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	 And when the dislocation is in front of the parts, then it is necessary that the leg be extended slightly, and according to this same narrative, place it on the knee; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patient's heel, and then presses down with the other hand, and with this pressure, extends the part behind the part of the shin.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	 And if the dislocation is behind the parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended behind the part, and should be raised from the ground; it is also necessary that he be placed on a hard surface, just as we have said about the elevation if his hip is dislocated outward, according to what has been said about placing him on two hips; and it should be on its face and the limbs stretched out, as we have said, there is no doubt.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	 And it is necessary that a compression with a board be applied to the location where the joint is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	 Therefore, when the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of its reduction is not hidden from you, and that is when you extend both legs of the patient and when you see those joints and the patient extends their leg and spreads it without hesitation, then you know that the limb has returned to its proper place — at that point, you adjust two cushions, apply plaster, and bind with a bandage in such a way that the width is not increased in any of the parts; and have the patient rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	 And then remove the bandage and the plaster, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	 At that point, if you see those joints in their proper form, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	 And if you see any sign of swelling, then return and plaster that area, and stretch it according to your initial procedure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	 And then remove the plaster, and make the patient delay walking on each leg for some days, until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	 This appears to be the Roman numeral for the number 32, so it likely translates to "Chapter 32".
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	 This phrase translates to "On the treatment of a dislocated shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	 "The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward to the side, inward toward the chest, and more often backward; but it cannot be dislocated forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	 "And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to lift their leg with their hip; then you will know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	 "And the treatment for all of its dislocations is that you make the patient lie on their back, so that they can extend their leg if possible; then adhere your chest to their face, and place their foot between your feet; and then cause the shoulder to adhere with your palms, and hold those between your fingers above the shoulder with strength, while another assistant extends their leg until the shoulder returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	 "And a sign of reduction is that the patient's leg adheres easily to their hip.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	 "And then apply a plaster to it and cause the leg to adhere to the hip, and then bind both together with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbind them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	 And do not let the patient walk for several days until they are healed and strengthened.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	 But if the reduction of him to you is difficult, then administer strong extension with the lints which in the treatment of the hip were previously mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	 Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	 About the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	 The ankle is sometimes dislocated by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to custom, and the dislocation of it is done either at the inner parts or at the outer parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	 And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen on the side to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	 But the treatment of its reduction is easy, and that is to stretch it gently with the hands and to envelop it until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	 But in the treatment of it when it is dislocated according to custom, it is necessary that you make the patient lie flat on his back, and that he have a strong and valiant assistant behind him in the middle of his back.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	 And then take the foot with your right hand on the upper side, and with your left hand on the lower side of the foot in the heel area.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	 And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then two times with the left hand, and then extend it with the left hand; and press the sole of the foot with the right hand against the thigh without effort.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	 And do this two more times as we have said.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	 Then press the sole of the foot against the thigh a third time, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	 So if the foot returns to its normal position in one or two times following this method, and you see the foot swollen, it is good; but if not, then repeat the operation on him because he will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	 But if it is forbidden to reduce him with what we have recommended, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fasten a very strong rope firmly to the ground, and let it pass between his thighs, and you have already wrapped a cloth around him so that the patient does not hurt. ︎
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	 Then let the servants hold his thighs, and then another servant extend the foot with their hands or with a band that they place on the neck of the foot; and then each servant extends against the extension of his partner, and the rope should be extended between the patient's thighs holding him, so that his body is not pulled towards the sides beyond its natural extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	 And then the physician reduces the dislocation with his hands, while another attendant holds the healthy part at the sides, because the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	 And when the dislocation returns and its health is declared to you by reduction, then place a plaster and secure it with strong bandages, and bind the foot to the leg with a bandage.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	 And you should be careful or guard against the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over them is not too strong and presses on them firmly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	 And then leave it for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes softened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	 And then unbind it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	 But if the patient is forced to walk before that time, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted in him, and then he may not receive cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	 And if an abscess forms, then you should administer to him the treatment that we have previously mentioned in another place of care and poultice, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	 Chapter 34
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	 Of the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	 Tell him who is dislocated to be wrapped with a bandage without much tension, and that it is not difficult, but rather easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	 However, if the dislocation is in some toes of the foot, then tell the patient to place their foot on a soft pad or on a table, and stand as if walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	 And then you stand on the toes, and place your foot on what is softest of the joints, and then step on it with all your weight until it returns to its proper position, and you see that it has been wrapped and no protrusion appears.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	 And then place under the sole of his foot a board that takes all the foot, which has two handles, and then strengthen it with a decent and firm binding for three days; and then unbind it and make him rest from walking for several days, until it is healed and recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	 Chapter 35
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	 Of the types of dislocation that are caused by a blow, or by a fracture, or by both together.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	 When such a cause occurs and you undertake the treatment of that dislocation and its restoration, many times death occurs.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	 And for this, it is not fitting that someone presumptuous interfere in his care, but rather one who is wise in the art, with long experience, merciful and compassionate, cautious, not rash or presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning of medicines that simply sedate inflammations, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, unless it is someone whom you expect salvation from ruin, with relief from the illness, and in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	 And then strive immediately to make a reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before an inflammation occurs.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	 And then if the member returns as desired, administer a regimen that sedates inflammation and treats the wound with what is suitable for it from the drying ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	 And if there is a dislocation with fracture and the bones are separated, then bore through their substance, and do in it as we have said concerning simple illnesses, preceding in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	 And guard and avoid according to your power that which is against the path of fear, as my preceding sermon has instructed you; for this is better for you with regard to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more healthful to your true body in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	 "Thus ends the words of Al-Bukhari perfectly, for which may God be praised.
Amen.	 "Amen
