The author of this book said, "I have completed this book for you as a part of the sciences in medicine, with its complete understanding and clear presentation. I saw that it would be complete for you with this statement, which is a part of the handiwork.
Because handiwork is praised in our country and time, and there is lack of precision until it was studied and its effect was lost. But only a slow movement remains in the books of the early ones, which has been recorded by hand and the errors and distortions of its strokes have ruined its meanings and deprived it of its benefits.
I saw that I should revive it and write this statement in it by way of explanation, clarification, and abbreviation, and I came with images of the tools and other instruments of work because it increases the description and is a sample of what is needed for it.
The reason why there is no skilled craftsman with his hand in our time is that the craft of medicine is long and it is appropriate for its owner to retreat before that in the science of dissection, which was described by Galen. Until it stands on the advantages of the organs and their contents, their moods and separations, knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles and number of them and their exits and the sweat glands and the sweat ducts and the locations of their exits.
Indeed, doctors are many in name but few in fact, especially in the craft of the hand. We have mentioned some of these parts from this book.
For if he did not know the dissection we mentioned, he would not have fallen into errors that have killed many people as I have seen many do so in this science and falsely claim knowledge without it.
Indeed, I saw a doctor uneducated in dissection who operated on a goiter in the neck of a woman, cutting some of her throat arteries and causing her to bleed to death right before his hands.
I also saw a doctor who, when removing a large piece of a man's gallbladder that had become inflamed after being pierced with a spear in old age, used a piece of caustic substance to extract it. The man remained for about three days, and I was called to remove it and found that the bone of the gallbladder had become unstable and could not be removed.
I also saw a doctor who was in competition with some of our rulers in medicine.
A slave of ours had a fracture near the knee with a wound, and the doctor, due to his ignorance, closed the fracture over the wound with nails and hairs, closing it tightly and leaving no opening for the wound to breathe.
He then applied pressure to his wound, leaving it for a few days and ordering that the splint not be removed until his toes and fingers had healed and been strengthened.
He urged her to hurry and remove the splint, achieving relief and leaving his pain behind, but alas, corruption had become ingrained in the member, and he could not restore its shape.
The corruption continued to plague the member until it was destroyed.
I saw another physician remove a cancerous tumor after several days, and the patient's bone became completely sound. This is because if the cancer is caused by mixing lead with silver, it should not be exposed to silver nitrate.
However, if there is a risk of the member becoming cancerous again, all of it should be removed.
Therefore, O children, it is advisable for you to learn that the work of your hands should be divided into two parts: one part is safe and the other part has pain in most cases.
And she has warned in all places where this book comes from the work that contains deceit and fear, so it is advisable for you to avoid it.
So that the ignorant do not find the path to speech and questioning, take care of yourselves with determination and caution, and for your illness, take care of it with companionship and firmness.
Use the best way leading to safety and certain cure, and cut out the dangerous diseases that are hard to heal.
Be not afraid of what enters into you of falsehood in your religion and worldly life, for it remains with you until the day of your death and elevates you in this world and the hereafter according to your virtues.
Jahnune said in some of his sayings, "Do not treat the disease of evil and call the doctors of evil.
This article is divided into three sections.
The first section is...
In the first part, there is a description of tools and instruments used in surgery from ancient times to the present day.
The second section...
In the second part, there is a description of surgical procedures and operations, including caesarian sections and the removal of foreign objects.
The third section...
In the third part, there is a description of surgical procedures for removing tumors and other growths, as well as their treatment from ancient times to the present day.
The first section...
In the first part, there is a description of tools and instruments used in surgery from ancient times to the present day.
Before mentioning the work, it is necessary to mention the advantages and disadvantages of its use and in what mood it is used.
Indeed, I say that the matter of the benefits and harm of the knife is a long speech, an accurate knowledge, a hidden secret, about which many rulers have spoken.
They differed in it and their brief speech was due to fear of amputation.
Indeed, the knife benefits by the sentence for every bad mood that is with a material and without a material, and these are the harsh mood without a material and the calm mood without a material.
And as for the calm mood with a material, they differed in it and some said that the knife is beneficial in it and others said against it that the knife is not suitable in a disease that is from heat and cold because the image of the heat is heat and cold.
And it is not possible to cure from a hot and cold disease with a hot and cold remedy, and those who say against it said that the knife in fire is beneficial for a hot and cold disease that occurs in the bones of people. Because when you added the human body and its moisture to the heat of the fire, you infected the human body with cold.
And I say by experience that this has been revealed to me many times that it is not appropriate to imagine this matter except from having struck and scraped in the door of the knife a deep scrape. Stand on the differences in moods of people and the conditions of diseases in themselves and their causes and symptoms and duration of time.
And the rest of the matter has no fear for you, and especially the cold wet diseases, as all doctors agreed on them and did not differ in their benefit in them.
And know, O children, that the treatment of the disease by fire is better than that by burned drugs because the fire is a pure element that does not exceed the function of the organ that smokes and does not harm another connected organ except a slight harm.
And the treatment of the disease by burned drugs may exceed the function of some organs and maybe cause a disease in the organ that makes its movements difficult and maybe kill it, and the fire does this out of honor and dignity of its element because it has not exceeded.
This has become clear to us by experience through the long service and care of the craft and standing on the facts of the matter.
For this I have omitted much speech, and if it did not suit the style of this book, I would have brought you to you in fire a secret, mysterious and how it works in the bodies and negation of diseases with philosophical rhetoric that proves your opinions.
Instruct them, O sons, that they have differed regarding the time when the couch is most suitable and have chosen the springtime as the best.
And I say that the couch may be suitable in every time because the injury caused by the time takes a long time to be compensated by the couch. Especially since the couch is a strong, well-nourished one that cannot be delayed for fear of it being followed by the greatest internal injury caused by time.
Nor should the common, uninformed physicians be deceived by the couch that relieves a disease that will not return at any time and makes them believe in its permanence.
Nor should they think that the couch is like the medicine that alleviates the mood and dries the wetness that causes the injury.
But the couch prefers the medicine in speed of its success, strength of its effect, and power of its dominance.
And the disease may return at the time of its pleasure, strengthening its disease and what satisfies its body from the frivolity of its desires, neglecting itself in acquiring them from food and such.
O Allah, may not the disease be one that is used in which is a laziness of mind and excess of moisture. Like the case of the wound, where pain may not return and it is small.
And the general statement that the knife is the last of medicine is correct because they believe there is no benefit in a remedy or otherwise after the cut, and the opposite of this is the order.
For the meaning that the knife is the last of medicine is that when we used the drugs in the treatment of a disease and they did not work, we then used another thing, the knife, which cured us. This is why the knife is the last of medicine. The meaning does not go as the general statement and many ignorant doctors.
The early ones said that the knife in gold is better than the knife in iron, and they said that because of the value of gold and the essence of its core, and they said that it does not affect the position of the knife, that is not true.
Because I have tried that and found that it only does that in some wounds without others, and the knife in gold is better and more effective than iron, as they say, except if you protect the wound from the fire of gold, you do not know when you will protect it on the scale you want for the golden glow.
Because it speeds up the cold and if increased in its effects, causes fever to rise like fire and weaken the craftsman of this type, so copper became faster and closer to the right for work, if God wills.
And this chapter was placed in the knife among the sections he made from the head to the foot to make it easier for the student to find what he wants, if God wills.
The first section.
In the head, a single knife is used.
This knife helps to remove moisture and coldness from the brain, which are causes of headache, frequent headaches from the sides of the eyes and ears, frequent sleeping, toothache, and sore throat. And each disease that exposes coldness, such as fever, chills, and cough, is from the diseases.
This knife image to order the patient to take the easy medicine for the head three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient and his age and recovery.
Then order him to massage his head with olive oil, then place him between your hands, steady, with his hands on his chest.
Then place the tip of the scalpel on the end of the incision between his eyes, until the middle of your finger ends, to teach that position with the thread.
Then apply this ointment, which is depicted in this image.
Remove the skull bone of the horse's head or the horn of the curly tail, lift your hand, and if it did not, sharpen your hand with the same iron or another one, or without it. Until you see what I mentioned from the bone, then take something from salt and dissolve it in water, drink from it, place a cloth on the position and leave it for three days.
Then wrap it in a wet cloth and leave it on until the ashes of the fire disappear, then treat it with the four-part marshmallow until it is free, if God wills.
And they said that the wound, whenever it remains open, increases the growth of the hair, it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them mentioned that the skin should be attached to the bone and hold the ointment until a part of the bone burns, then it should be cleaned after that what burned from the bone, then it should be treated.
And others said that it should be applied deeply until it affects the bone with a strong effect, so it falls from the bone like the arch of the foot or the small flap, and they claimed that it takes away the position of the back of the head and leaves the wound open for a long time.
Then he is treated until it subsides, and I do not see these types of violent fevers in anyone except in some people who are on the road and leave them with me as the best and safe, if the head is swollen when the natural connection divides as we have seen in other organs.
Nor is it that the weak head was always like this, and the first type of fever was tamed and I prefer it over the other when I use it to free him. May God help me if he wants.
The second chapter.
And what about the head also.
If a chronic headache and inflammation of the temple lasts for a long time, the remedies used are the douches, the poultices, the compresses, the ointments, the plasters, and above all, if one of the described types of fever has been cured, nothing has helped him. Look. If the head of the fever was strong by nature and it was not weak, and he found a severe cold, then I applied another ointment over that little one. Then I applied a ointment on every part of his head until the skin becomes white and the bone comes out of the cavity that we described. In the later part of the head, in the region known as the temple, gently place your hand and do not expose the bone as the patient will experience severe pain unlike other methods for the head. I will remind you of this position.
It is preferable that the incision should be made along the temples rather than in the middle of the head, as shown in this image.
The third section.
In the case of the non-chronic sister.
If pain occurs in the head and spreads to the eye, give the patient medication for headaches and use other treatments mentioned in the classification of diseases. If that does not help, the case is severe on both sides. Either the strong, burning medicine or the lead.
If the medicine is strong and burning, take one clove of garlic, grate it and cut its ends from both sides, then make an incision in the place of the pain in the shoulder with a narrow blade until it becomes a hole in the skin that can hold the garlic.
The garlic is left for 15 hours, then removed and the wound is left open for two or three days, and it is carried.
He should make a dressing of burning drugs on the sore until it heals, then treat it with the caustic ointment so that it may be expelled if God wills, and if not, do this with some of the drugs mentioned in the thirteenth article of the caustic ointments.
As for the mercury, it is used on this face: It protects the face that looks like this:
The sulfur is called the 'sulfur face' because its head resembles a sulfur pot with some burning in the middle and a small hole.
Then place it on the painful spot, hold your hand, and a little amount of mercury is applied, and the amount that burns through the skin is like half of it. And raise your hand so that you do not burn the string that is below, causing bleeding, then moisten a cloth in salty water and place it on the spot and leave it for a third of a day. Then hold the cloth with smoke and treat it with the caustic ointment so that it may be expelled if God wills.
And if you wish to cut this sister's face with the smooth side of the sulfur and preserve the cuts in this non-inflamed sister, especially.
The Fourth Chapter.
In the case of the chronic sister.
If the sister was treated with the advanced treatments and methods we mentioned in the classification of diseases, the treatment did not help and I noticed that none of the symptoms disappeared as mentioned in the first remedy or the second one by fire. It is advisable to protect the smooth bandage until it turns white after you have learned to apply it on the painful spot with a half finger or so, and leave your hand once and then tighten it until the cord breaks and reaches about the bone.
However, it is advisable for you to preserve the connection of the joint that moves with the muscle or nerve that moves it, as this may cause inflammation.
And be careful and gentle with the bleeding of the cord that was cut, as there is a risk of bleeding. And especially for those who do not know what is made and have not had a practical experience, and left the work to be done first.
And it will be mentioned in the book how to treat the bleeding from the cut cord on its place, if God wills, as I noticed from the symptoms that this method does not work.
I observed the body of the patient, possibly with a hole in the middle of the head, as we have described and treated the wound until it is removed, if God willing.
And if I wished, I would use the one mentioned in the chapter on tying the cord with the frame consisting of screws, as it is better and safer than this.
The fifth chapter.
In what kind of ear inflammation?
If there is inflammation in the ear, and it is due to cold, and it is treated with ointments and all the remedies we mentioned in the division, but the inflammation does not disappear, then apply the frame called the point that this picture represents.
Then wrap it around after applying it to the ear all around, or around them all if the pain is in them. And leave it a little away from the ear after learning its position with gauze and the frame should be about ten points in each ear or in the same way, then treat the sites until it is removed, if God willing.
The sixth chapter.
In what kind of strength?
In the strength that is treated with the frame, it can only be of the kind that happens from the strangulation as we mentioned in the classification of diseases.
Avoid the type that causes swelling and nerve irritation.
When you treated this kind of strength with purgatives, enemas, and laxatives, it did not heal, it is better that the remedy is a three-part cure. One at the base of the ear, the second below it slightly, and the third at the junction of the lobes.
Make your pressure against the affected side because relaxation only occurs in the side that appears correct.
A picture showing that the dressing is worn on the upper side of the ear, below the base of the head slightly, and another in the lobe, its length being equal to the length of the ache.
Your hand should be lowered until the half of the skin is burned, this is a picture of the bandage and it is a kind of scar that has been presented but it is more beautiful than this a little as you see. It is better that the bandage has a slight knot, then treat the place as you have mentioned until it is free if God wills.
The seventh chapter.
In the chronic cough.
If the cough became chronic and was treated as we have mentioned but the healing did not occur and there was no inflammation in your throat, then apply four treatments. On every side of the head, there are cuts and cuts in the middle of the head, as we mentioned, and cuts on the back of the head for what follows.
The description of the mucus for what follows, and it may also be a cut on the face of the stomach, which will be the most severe, then it is treated with what we have mentioned.
The eighth chapter.
How to forget.
The one who is from the Bragg should be washed by the attendant or first among the large grains and the crushed food for the brain.
Then he rolls his head completely and carries a written inscription on the back of it, which is carried several times because it is a blow from the cut.
And do this on the rank of the one we mentioned, if it is free from that and if not, then three cuts will be made at the back of his head, which will be a scalpel from the top of the head to the bottom of the neck.
And make between every cut and cut a sharp nail, then treat the cut with what we have mentioned, because if you want to increase it and the attendant was possible for that, then cut the middle cut.
If you want to increase it, then cut on both sides and treat it until it is clean, and the incision will be oily as shown in the image that was mentioned.
Chapter 9.
How to apply and relax the entire body.
It is recommended to advance in the cleansing of the head with decoctions and what we mentioned, then close the nostrils in the middle of the head and on each side of the head, and on the back of the head.
And three on the temples, if it is not enough for relaxation of the entire body, and the patient was likely for that and the disease was chronic and insidious, then close the nostrils four times on the temples. And inform him until the skin burns more of it and raises your hand, then treat it according to what was mentioned until he is free, and the ointment should be oily.
Chapter 10.
How to bathe.
However, the bath of the person who has his head washed by a barber, it is recommended that his brain be cleansed first with large decoctions and other treatments mentioned in the division, if the patient's forehead is large and there is a possibility of taking medicines.
And if the patient is a child and cannot take medicines, let him use enemas and colonic irrigation for the brain before that for many days with improvement of his diet.
Then, the surgeon shaves the head, then he introduces one of the instruments into the middle of the head, following the direction of the previous one and then another one at the end. And on each side of the head, if the patient is strong and it was possible, he shaves the instruments mentioned in the case and relaxes the body on the pillows of the neck and pillows of the back, and the shaving would be oily on the side that presented.
If the patient is a child, make the shaving gentle on this image.
The 12th chapter.
In the malnutrition.
If the cause of malnutrition is damp and badly saturated, shave the instruments mentioned in the case.
If the cause of malnutrition is a tendency towards sallowness and the patient's body is wet and not drying out his brain on what was presented in the division.
Then, shave the head of the patient, then make a firm ointment from dairy like a circle, then place it in the middle of the head of the patient and keep him steady on all sides, then take one grain of old goat fat.
Then he heats it over a gentle fire until the finger is slightly warm, places it in the center of the circle, and leaves it until it cools down, doing this once a week with his other good treatments, may God willing.
If you want to make many small kites, do not hold your hand with the dough but let it be roasted, because this kind of kite makes the brain more balanced.
Then she carries a damp cloth on his chest or in chicken fat.
The twelfth chapter.
In the water that falls on the eye.
If you notice the beginning of the water that falls on the eye with the signs mentioned in the division, the good physician will immediately clean his head and dry it from all the moisture and bathe it in the bath on the rick for several days.
Then she passes her hand over his head and rubs it in the middle of the head, then rubs it on both sides if the beginning of the water fall in both eyes or from one side if it is only in one eye.
Then she cuts all the cords and threads under the skin to make the holes long in the sides of the ribs and to preserve from bleeding of the blood.
If I see something of it, cut it on the spot with any available remedy, and we will come back to wisdom in tying the threads and cutting them and preserving from bleeding.
It may be found under the knee, two long and thin ones.
The thirteenth chapter.
In chronic tears.
If the tears of the eye are chronic and have been before the eyebrow and the threads that are visible on the outside of the head from inside the head, and it seems that this is due to a cold wind blowing strongly from the north, and it has caused the nose to become red and has been described as such at the beginning of the water falling. In the middle of the head, two on the shoulders and two in the knee under the thighs, and if it increased the redness of the nose on both sides of the eye socket with a small patch.
The fourteenth chapter.
In how to tie the nose.
If it was treated as we mentioned in the division and the remedy did not work, then the patient should immediately consult the barber Al-Qawalli and spend three nights, and then apply the ointment of the middle part of the nose with the small patch. Then, using the scalpel, cut a small incision on both sides of the shoulders, just below the hairline, and preserve the tendon, do not cut it. This is a picture of the scalpel.
The 14th chapter.
In which part of the eye muscle is relaxed?
If the eye muscle relaxes due to disease or dryness of the conjunctiva, one such incision with this scalpel is sufficient.
And if you want, make a small incision on both sides of the shoulders, just below the clavicles, away from the sternum, and make each incision the same length as the shoulder.
Do not force your hand, only as much as the skin burns, and the picture of the incision will be on this side.
The 13th chapter.
In which part of the eye muscle?
If the eyelids turn inward, the inner part of the eye is affected, and it is located on two types. Either by fire or by the drug that burns, the incision made by fire requires that the eyelids be left alone if they do not tear beforehand until it swells and closes.
When it first sprouts, it closes the eyes with a ring to prevent movement until it blooms, and if it blooms and swells, place the head of the scalpel in the stone, then learn on the eye muscle with wax as a mark of the shape of a piece of paper.
The beginning of the sign is near the ribs, then a piece of moist cloth is placed under it in egg white or in the shells of the blue grapes, and then this shape is covered.
Then it is wrapped around the shape you have learned a little bit many times until the surface of the skin, which is like the surface of a piece of newspaper as a whole, becomes visible, and this is a sign of your health that you can see the whites of your eyes have become cloudy and your hair has grown from the cheek.
Then lift your hand at that time and leave it for three days, then wrap it with a cloth of sesame until the dandruff disappears, then treat it with olive oil until it is clean if God wills, because something of the hair returns after some time and the skin relaxes.
Then apply the ointment as before, because if the hair is in the lower eyelid it should be returned to its natural position and not touch the eye, and as for the ointment that is burned, it is that you command the eyelid to leave the ribs until they swell and cover.
Then make a shape of newspaper from the gut and take some soap and some unsqueezed gypsum from each one, weighing it as much as a dirham or about it, and rub them all with a good rub and do this with the hand to prevent it from becoming dry. Then, she expands it on the ribs that were made into a paper of the eye, places it on the single or double eyelid, and puts a damp cloth under the eye in the egg white, with the tip of the needle in the marble.
Then, she places the little finger of your hand over the medicine and slightly ties it whenever the needle finds heat in the medicine because it finds heat like fire. As long as it finds heat, leave the medicine and move it with your finger. If the heat disappears, untie the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And see, if I see the ribs have risen as they rise when heated with fire or sharp objects. Otherwise, apply the medicine again on the same place that the medicine did not affect it and has not yet been achieved until your work is complete and the eye swells then put a damp cloth on it until the flame of the burn disappears.
Then, treat it with the willow or other similar ointments until it is cleaned, and it is advisable for you when working to preserve the maximum preservation so that nothing of the medicine falls into the eye because the ribs relax after a few days and I fear that something will be in the eye.
Prepare the medicine for that area which has recovered from the inflammation, especially as you first did, then treat it until it is cleared, and this is a picture of paper alum.
Be aware that the eyes of people may differ in size, depending on that, so let your eye be sharp, and do not overlook the right way due to lack of experience in this craft.
The 17th chapter.
In the horse that is displayed in the eye socket.
If you treated the horse as we mentioned in the diagnosis of diseases, then your treatment would not have been effective. It is better to treat it on this basis.
Order the patient to place his head in your stone and hold it with a servant between your hands, keeping it still and not moving or tilting his head.
Then place a wet cloth on the egg white or on the fur of the rabbit on his eyelids, and this is the appearance of the cover.
It should be curved like the tube of the lion's horn on one side where the eye is, and if you want it to be curved on the other side and not closed like the mongoose, then this curve is better for your work, if God wills.
Then the horse-shoe is opened if it is open and the duration is extracted or if it is not open, it is opened and the nail is taken out. Then, on this occasion, the dressing is placed on it, which is a thick covering, and you hold onto it with your hand until it reaches the bone.
And move your hand slightly away from the eye towards the nostril lest you cut your finger or hurt the patient and the dressing falls into the eye and spoils it, if it reaches the bone first time, or else re-place the dressing if it did not.
Leave it for three days and then cover it with a damp cloth and treat it with the caustic soda until it is clean, if it does not come out after forty days, carry on treating it with the strong alkaline medicine until the bone comes out and remove it according to what you remember from that section, if Allah wills.
Another face of the horse-shoe is mentioned by some of the early writers, it aims at placing the horse-shoe in its position and then placing a thin clay in the same place.
Place a lead shot in it, which is slightly melted, and hold your hand with the clay tightly, firmly but not painfully, so that the patient's eye does not move, lest the melted lead shoot comes into his eye, it is recommended to place a wet cloth on the patient's eye, either in egg-white or in water.
Lead burns the position of the nasal bone and removes it in an extraordinary manner, if not, then it is necessary to use a nasal sponge and the nasal septum into its own position.
The Eighth Chapter.
In the treatment of wounds.
Scabs often occur in wounds, known as crusts, especially in the faces of children, and if these scabs are treated as we mentioned in the division, the treatment will not work and a small sterile gauze should be placed on this picture.
The wound bed should be covered with a sterile gauze, then place it in the scab until it reaches the depth of the scab, and treat it with iodoform if possible.
The Ninth Chapter.
In the case of a severe nasal bone fracture in the mouth.
If the fracture occurs in the upper jaw, lower jaw, or cheekbone, and then it becomes inflamed and erupts, and a nasal bone is formed, and the wound is treated, the treatment will not work, and it is recommended to cover the wound with a dressing as much as possible in the nasal bone.
The patient's arm is inserted into the horseshoe-shaped wound of the nipple and your hand held there until the iron reaches the gore and the other and then does this once or twice, and then treats it afterwards as we have mentioned in the treatment until it is cleared, if God wills.
If the material has been severed and is healed, but if not, then it must be exposed to see the bone, remove the bad bone according to what will come in the door if God wills.
The tenth book.
How to make the excision and the fifth dissection.
If the flesh has been drawn out by moisture and the excision has moved and treated with medicine and it did not heal, then cut off the head of the gallbladder in your stone and then cover the wound that appears after this and then put the tube on the stone.
And insert the covering into the stone with a lever and hold your hand slightly until the gallbladder feels the heat of the fire that has reached the root of the stone then raise your hand, then repeat the covering as many times as you want and then fill the gallbladder from the saltwater.
And it holds the stone with a watch and throws it if the moving stone is firm and the drawn flesh becomes thicker and dries the bad moisture.
The 10th Chapter and 20th Section.
In what part of the chest does the heave occur.
If the heave is due to cold and there is no improvement with medication, then it is on both sides, either due to fatness or due to heat.
And if it is due to fatness, then take the fat of the sheep, make it into a paste and put it in a copper vessel or in a mortar, then take a cloth and wring it out on the wounded side and place it on the inflamed part of the chest with the fatty paste and keep it there until it cools down.
Then repeat it several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the heave, and if you want to wrap a marble or a cloth in cold fat and place it on the wounded side with a copper cover above it until the fire reaches the root of the heave.
And if it is due to heat, then it is in a copper tube or a copper pipe with some thinness so that the hot fire does not reach the mouth of the patient, then wrap the paste that comes out and place it on the same side and keep your hand on it until the paste cools down. Do this several times.
The pain either leaves that day with it, or at another time, and it is recommended after that the abscess be filled with good fat and tied for an hour, then it should be removed, and this is the image of the abscess.
It is formed on which side you want and according to what can be done, and this is the image of the tube.
The 28th chapter.
In the case of wounds.
If the wounds were caused by cold and moisture and were not infected with pus and you wanted a quick growth, then close the abscess that is slightly open, which is this image of it with both sides exposed.
Let the smoke come out of the other side and place it protected on top of the tumor twice, until it reaches the depth of the tumor, if the tumor is small, make the abscess according to the size of the tumor.
Then leave it for three days and cover it with a greasy cloth until what burned in the fire is gone, then treat it with mucilage and sugars until it is freed, if God wills.
The 29th chapter.
In the case of narrowing of the voice box and constriction of the chest.
When moisture prevails over the bronchi and especially when it is accompanied by depression of spirits, it is advisable that the patient first takes easy drugs, then a cataplasm should be applied to the lower part of the neck where the hyoscyamus grows.
Be careful not to apply the poultice to the larynx and do not burn the skin except for half of it, then apply another poultice at the end of the neck in the last part of it, which has been cleansed, and the poultice should be moist on the side that was previously applied.
Then treat him according to what has been mentioned until he is cured, if God wills.
The Fourth and Twentieth Chapter.
In which disease the lungs and stomach are affected.
If the cough and lung disease were caused by cold moisture and the patient was not feverish nor had a swelling, but the disease was chronic, then apply a poultice on both sides of the chest in the lower parts of the white empty ribs, and another poultice in the middle of the back between the kidneys.
And the poultice should be moist on the side that was previously applied, and if you wish, you can use the poultice called the point, which has been described in the treatment of ear pain, and the points should be three or four in number towards it.
After treating it as previously described, remove it, and create a three-edged piece on this image, which accelerates the process because you will cut all three edges at once. This is the image of the piece.
The fifth chapter of the book.
In the middle of the bone.
If the head of the bone is removed due to dampness or has not been fixed in time, it should be reattached until it becomes permanent, then it will fall off at the slightest movement as we have seen. It is advisable that the joint be treated first. Then, the patient should lie on his side or on the correct side, and then raise the skin inside the bone by using your left fingers if the joint has been removed inside.
Then, cover the piece with the three edges as shown in the image.
Then, cover it with skin until it is completely removed to the other side and forms a four-edged piece, and if it is covered with a three-edged piece, the shape will be four-edged at that time, with the edges on the edge of the material.
This is the image of the three-edged piece.
The number of needles may increase to this one, and then it will carry the sharp points with salt, followed by the surgeon's call, and does not move the part until it strengthens, and if the excision is from above and the margin is as such.
If the needle is placed above the pulley, one good-quality or many needles are used for drilling, and the bone becomes stronger and the moisture escapes and the surgeon is relieved.
The 16th section.
In the stomach.
If the stomach is affected by cold and excessive moisture until it is expelled from its bed, with many diarrhea and treated with remedies, it is best for the surgeon to lie on his back, extend his legs and arms, and then insert three needles. Needles are placed under the chest bone with a thumb-sized piece of gauze and two more below on either side of the first needle until the shape of the needles resembles an equilateral triangle and are far enough apart so they do not overlap if they are removed. The depth of the needles should be about one-third of the thickness of the skin, and the shape of the needles should be triangular.
Upon this picture and on this scale, without anything more.
And if you wish for a single large pouch in the middle of the abdomen on this picture.
And the pouch that envelops this single large pouch on this picture should be in the shape of a circle on this picture.
And the stomach should be taught on this single large pouch with points on the scale you want, then enveloped with a circular pouch, and treated with the treatment until it is relieved.
The seventh and twentieth section.
In the cold stomach.
If the stomach is exposed to cold and dryness or to a cold breeze until it leaves its natural state, leaving an open wound, and treats the wound with what we mentioned in the division, this did not heal. It is recommended that the wound be placed on the patient's elbow and learned with the thread on three forms of this shape and this amount on the stomach below the shoulder, where the human appendage ends.
And each form and form should be on the end of the finger, and the form should be on the length of the body straight, and do not close your hand with the thread yes.
Let the flame not exceed half of the skin, and the leg should be firmly planted on its feet, otherwise it will be unsteady, having raised its knees. This is the image of the wound.
These cuts can be sealed with the smooth dressing if you have a knife and cotton, to prevent infection and keep it from burning the skin, which will then burn the belly and reach the organs. The skin is thin, so know this.
The 8th and 28th section.
In the liver with a cut in the gallbladder.
If the discharge is found in the liver meat, and you want to know if it's a tumor in the liver or its gallbladder, then it is a tumor in the liver, as it finds resistance and pain without excess.
And if it's in the gallbladder, there is severe pain and I thought you had to see a doctor for treatment. It would be best to place the leg on its side, then learn on the warmer area with the dressing.
Then, the dressing is heated in the fire and this is the dressing that resembles pitch and this is its image. The patient's wound should be dressed with a single method until the entire skin is burned and ends with the scar until all the time passes. Then, it should be treated with the treatment of exudates until it is clean.
This type of dressing should not be used except in the case of a surgeon who has experienced this disease many times and can perform this operation better.
The ninth and twentieth section.
In the application of the plaster.
The first type of plaster is made from the cold plaster of the zarund, which is taken from the long, thin base of the zarund and is longer than what you find, and it resembles the big toe. Then, it is immersed in oil and burned. Then, a single dressing is applied between the connection of the strap to the neck and two small ones without much pressure, slightly sloping towards the side under the loincloth and two large ones above the kidneys between the third and fourth belts.
And the two dressings are also between the fifth and sixth belts, slightly sloping towards the back a little, and another one in the middle of the chest, another above the stomach, and three more from the back of one, two on either side of the belt below the belt that is between the shoulders.
Do not insert your hand too deeply, but rather make an incision in the skin that is just deep enough to allow access to the tumor.
The duration varies as we mentioned in the liver tumor case, and in this matter of gallstone impaction, either the patient may die within an hour or the stone may be exposed in its position without a remedy.
The thirtieth section.
In what direction the incision is made.
If the gallbladder disease was treated as we mentioned in the treatment section, then you would not recover because the cure is in three or four directions, and the incision should be made in three or four sections along the length of the gallbladder.
In the shape of the gallbladder as it appears and between each section, there should be a space as wide as the tip of the finger or less, and the depth of the incision should be the same as that described in the liver case, and do not insert your hand too deeply, and the tumor is placed on the back of the patient.
The other side as shown in the figure and lift the skin on the opposite side where the left liver gallstone attachment ends, and lift the skin on the opposite side where the left liver gallstone attachment ends, and your hand should be raised above the body to allow the incisions to be along the length of the body.
The surgeons then enter the saws deeply until the skin is penetrated from the other side, and then they extract the blades, making the incisions four in number. If you wish to make the incisions with the other blade of three saws, you can.
Then treat the wound after leaving it to hang the gut for many days, as it is the best of all treatments.
The ninth and thirtieth section.
In the case of drinking.
The drink only helps in the case of dry drinking, especially, if the patient is treated with the doses of treatment that we mentioned in the division, then your treatment was not effective, so it is better to make four incisions around the abdomen and one incision on the stomach.
And another incision on the liver, and an incision on the gallbladder, and two incisions behind his ribs between the cartilages one in front of his chest and another in front of his stomach, and the length of the incision is close to the cartilage, then leave the incision open for the gut to hang for a long time.
Do not remove the patient from treatment after the incision, as it accelerates the healing, and the image of the incision that is made on the back will be similar to what has been shown and the one that is made on the back will be oily.
The second and thirteenth part.
In the feet and legs.
If the swelling occurs in the instep and the feet are filled with red water, it is recommended to apply it on the back of the foot between the knuckles and the big toe.
Then cover your hand with a cloth and do not wring it out, then lift your hand without pressing it. This will help to remove the red water and the cloth will look like this.
Then apply it on both ankles, with the cloth facing the narrow side of the cloth and placed along the length of one leg below the hip and the other above it towards the middle of the leg, on both insteps.
And leave the cloth open without long-term treatment and it will help to remove the water from it, then treat it with other things we have mentioned.
The third and thirteenth part.
In the case of vomiting.
If the vomiting is due to cold and dampness until the strength of the gastrointestinal tract and the diarrhea have decreased, it should be treated with doses of medication and I did not see any possibility for the cloth to have affected the stomach, then apply a large cloth on his stomach. Regarding the stomach, it is covered by a circular piece and four sides surrounding the umbilicus. It is smoothly covered with a fine sheet on top of large or small buttons.
If I see abundant moisture and slight dryness, then the patient's cloth should be removed and applied to all parts, possibly adding two small pieces on either side of the stomach near the large one. This is a successful treatment that does not cause harm, if God wills.
The fourth and thirteenth section.
In the area around the chair.
If there are many chronic patients in the chair, or one was a severe wound, cold, damp, and treated as we mentioned in the division, the patient's cloth did not improve, then three pieces of cloth should be placed below the backbone under the table, slightly folded.
Three pieces of cloth under the pelvis, as if fingers, and if you think that his stomach has cooled and food does not reach his face, then his cloth should be applied to the stomach a large piece on top of the small one and a piece on his chest. Another method involves making an incision with a scalpel, leaving the skin open for a while, then treating it until it is cleansed if God wills.
The fifth chapter and thirtieth section.
In the second part of the Quran.
After cutting the throat, if you have cut it, sharpen the blade of the scalpel and insert it into the same cut in the neck until your hand is clean. Do this once or twice.
If the throat is large, treat each part separately according to what suits it from the dressings until it is cleansed. If the wound is large on the cloth, it was reported in the benefit.
The sixth chapter and thirtieth section.
In the case of the Nero who is in the throne and its surroundings.
If the treatment does not require the removal of the crown and the operation described in its place, it is better to abandon it. However, if a Nero becomes infected with wetness and impurities, the first thing you should do is to examine it with a small compass.
Then determine the size of the hole with the compass, then sharpen the blade of the scalpel and insert it into the same cut in the Nero until the Nero is steady and the compass has entered it and add to it as many times as you need to burn all the impure bodies.
Preserves from the burning of a nerve if there is or a great scar, and if the lance pierces into the sinew it goes to the sinew of the thigh or the sinew of the calf.
Preserve these sites all, but only if the lance is in the thigh and it is not pierced, then treat the area until it is clean, and when the area is healed and the materials are cut off from it, know that it is completely cured.
And if it does not heal completely, know that it is still infected or in a rotten bone or something similar that is mentioned in its place.
The seventh and thirtieth chapter.
In the kidney.
If it happens in the kidney, with pain and a sharp wind and a lack of urine, it is recommended to apply a poultice on both knees on the same kidney, using a mucilage poultice as mentioned, and possibly a third one in the same table, so that the benefit is apparent.
The eighth and thirtieth chapter.
In the mumps.
In case of a hangover, weakness and relief from cold and dryness until the patient cannot hold down food, place a piece of cloth on the abdomen below the navel, where the hair of the affliction begins and another on the right side of the abdomen and another on the left.
After the piece of cloth from both sides is placed on the abdomen below the chest or on both sides if it is desired and the cloth is folded according to what has been done.
The ninth and thirtieth chapter.
In the matter of the rheum.
If there is a matter of rheum, cold and dryness, the patient stopped taking medicine and the bandage became swollen and difficult to remove or happened to it when it was introduced, it is necessary to place three pieces of cloth around the abdomen as we mentioned in the matter of the hangover. A piece of cloth on the linen below the chest or three pieces and the cloth is folded.
The fourth chapter.
In the matter of the worm.
Wet may be inserted into the worm's position and it will be a sign that the worm has come out of its place and the leg extends over the other if some of them are pulled towards each other and you find the place of removal in it, then place the cloth on the worm's own position as a circle.
After learning about the square from the milk, and understanding that the square is in the center of the circle and the image of this square appears in the stomach, if you do not prepare this square, then three types of large olive oil squares will be needed.
Draw the depth of the skin on a scale and then treat it until God willing, it is clean.
The third and fortieth chapter.
In the matter of female desire.
If pain occurs in the womb and the cause is cold and dryness, and the fistula was treated as we mentioned in the division, but the pain did not subside and it became worse, then it is recommended to ease the fistula from tight clothing or tight shoes by loving the tailor or loving the seamstress.
Then, draw the depth of the face on two points, either by burning drugs or by fire, and one of these points is that it should be drawn on the womb itself three times like this picture.
And draw a correct depth for it, and it should be between each square and the next one on the edge of the enlarged finger, and the image is olive oil and may be drawn in the middle on the head of the womb itself to make four squares, and if you want, it can be drawn in the circle that is mentioned as removing the womb with one square.
The circle should surround all the wounds and burn the entire skin, this is the description of the gall in the female genitalia when the pain is due to the wound itself and not extended to the ankle and leg.
If it extends to the ankle and leg, then it should be cut on the ankle at the position indicated by your pain, and then cut above the tendons with four fingers to the wild side a little, and the incision should be narrow and the depth of the cut should only be as thick as the skin.
And if it indicates that the pain extends to the direction of the fingers of the hand, then the incision should be made at the point indicated by you with three or four or more points, and if it indicates the pain below the knee towards the leg, then the incision should be a single narrow one.
And take care in all cases that you inform me of the gall if it reaches an nerve or a large vein, as this will cause pain in the patient.
I have seen and heard one and another person cut above the tendons and cause the leg to swell until the swelling reached the foot, and all the leg was affected, and then the symptoms occurred and death followed after that, if the pain is in both sides of the leg on this basis.
The excerpt discusses a certain method of gastrostomy, where a small metal tube is inserted into the stomach, resembling a nail made of iron with a quarter-grain size. This tube is placed at the base of the grapevine or slightly less, and within it, there is another metal tube and a third one.
The excerpt describes that the space between each metal tube is equal to the size of a gall, and both ends are open. The height of the tubes is determined by the nail or nails, and they are attached with a metal clamp in the tubes. This is the appearance of it.
The excerpt explains that the tubes are then heated until they glow and burn off the hair. They are then placed on the wound and the surrounding area, allowing three layers of fat to be inserted in one go. The wound is left uncovered for three days, and then it is covered with fat. The wound is left open for three days.
The excerpt describes that the wound is then treated with a poultice until it heals. The author of this book states that this type of wound can be identified by its appearance and the difficulty in enduring it. However, if one perseveres, it is a good sign that they have recovered from their injury.
The excerpt translates to: "Regarding the treatment of burns, it is that one makes two wires similar to a lock's latch, in which a copper or iron hook is inserted.
The height of the notches in their hinges is about two fingers or so, and there is a gap between them that is like the tip of the little finger. They are open at the bottom and closed at the top, and some of them are attached to each other in this manner.
Then, it is placed on the true and false joint, bent at its side, and you should use your hand to hold it. Then, dip it in hot sand, which is heated by the fire-pincers, and hold it for a while, until the false joint is burned and charred, as if it were fire.
Until the burn is calm, then raise your hand with the tool and wipe the hot water from the false joint with soft water, then leave it for three days and carry it with fat until the white of the burn disappears and leaves behind days of healing, as it indicates benefit.
Then, treat it with ointment until it is clean, as if the pain extends to the leg or foot, make a mold for it according to what was made in the false joint, whether it is hot water or not, this is the nature of hot water and has been proven in an article on the repair of drugs.
He takes salt from the gallbladder and from unsoftened gallstones, cuts them into parts and places them in a new container that has been pointed with a small nail at the bottom, and places another mixed container under the cover of the container.
He pours water on the gallbladder and gallstones, moistens them with his thumb after tying them with good pressure, and leaves the container until the hot water flows out of the mixed containers below. Then he collects all the water together and pours it on another gallstone and another mixed container again.
And he becomes very powerful at this time and can perform many operations in the field of medicine and in other organs because it performs the action of fire in itself, and among the drugs there is what is found in the wrack also, such as thuja, gum Arabic, gall, and gallstone with soap.
Galen narrated the story of a footman who cured the wrack and women's menstrual pain, strengthened his reputation greatly, and claimed that he did not need any other treatment and that he cured once.
Until he may have entered the bath with his hand and come out cured, as he cures from green ointment because there is no green ointment in the modern one, he takes old sherbet with something of smoke and places it on the wrack where the pain is or in the thigh or in the elbow.
The patient should be kept awake for three hours or as long as the patient feels comfortable, then enter the bath and if his body shows signs of pain, he should enter the bathtub, in which case the pain will subside and by God's grace, if it does not subside, rebandage him after ten days, another time.
If he is cured by God's grace, know that it is not appropriate to use any of these drugs except after purging the body, and Dioscorides mentioned that if urine is mixed with female vaginal secretion, it has a beneficial effect.
The drug should be taken on this formula, it is mixed with honey and drunk in old oil, placed in the deep place between the penis and the testicle, closest to the testicle, then take a dry urine sample.
Heat it until it becomes a ball, then place it on the honey and leave it until it dries, take the rest of it and continue doing this until the pain passes through the testicle and settles in the thigh with God's will, this is called the powdered drug.
The second chapter and fortieth section.
In abdominal pain.
The pain in the back can be caused by various factors such as falling, striking, or excessive cutting, and it belongs to the category of cold, moist substances.
After the swelling subsides, it is recommended to apply warmth to the affected area where the pain is three folds on the edge of the plate itself, after learning the position of the bandage in each fold five times or more based on the likelihood of inflammation and its strength.
The bandage should be applied to the point and if you want to remove it, three or four times with a medium-sized, slotted bandage as shown in this image.
Chapter Three: The Shoulder.
In which the bandage begins.
This bandage is often applied to children and an indication of its beginning in a child is that they experience shortness of breath when sitting and moving, and they may have cracks on the back of their chest that have become exposed and are raised above the others.
If you see that and want to stop it, apply the bandage as shown in this image. Turn the incision on all sides of the wound with even pressure, and if necessary, bend it around the wound using a triangular piece of cloth twice or three times, ensuring the points are close to each other, then treat the area until it is cleared as we have mentioned.
And ensure you use the incision in the nerve sheath area.
The fourth chapter and the fortieth section.
In the incision of the knuckles and joints.
If the joint pain is due to cold moisture that is applied to any part of the body, and this happens in both legs, it is common for doctors to refer to this as a specific incision.
If the cold incision is treated with the remedies we mentioned in the division and the pain persists, the incision goes deeper and there are many folds around the knee of the leg, and the cloth is a medium-viscosity oil on this image.
And if the pain is on the leg's face, use the cloth on the points, and if the pain spreads to the knees or other joints, it is often seen that this is done on all four sides of the knee with this medium-viscosity oil.
If the wound is more than this, do not touch it with your hand, but make it as if you were scraping the skin only, for if the pain rises to the back or chest, use what we mentioned in that chapter.
If the pain is only in the hands, cut around the nail as the fingers turn, and if the pain remains in the fingers, cut them on each knot point and on the palm, for if the pain rises to the sides or the back after days, it may be due to a problem with the limbs.
Cut from both sides and do not let the patient's condition worsen, and take the medicine if possible, for if the diet is good and you fast, then this will help with this kiyah, insha'Allah.
Chapter Fifty-Four.
In the fifth chapter.
If a tooth is exposed in the gum and some pus and inflammation have descended to the periapex, it is advisable to order the patient to abstain from food that day and use mouth washes with the pus that comes out of the root.
Then, have him place his face on your hand on the back of the affected limb and order him to hold himself until the swelling or pus becomes visible, then gently press it with your finger, then learn the pulse under the tooth on the affected limb, which resembles half a circle on the side towards the top of the body.
Then this covering protects its shape.
Until the white egg wraps the seed, then it wraps the core with a shell or a bead. Then the servant places his hand on the position to prevent the shell from being exposed and has placed a pillow and another servant's hand under it.
And the last on his chest holds his hands, then the covering descends on itself and he grasps it with both hands standing upright and holds it until it reaches the bone or returns it again if it does not reach the bone.
And preserve the effort of the covering while you are lifting it so that it does not burn in the abdomen, either death or great weakness will occur on the abdomen, and know that if you do not reach the bone with the covering, your work has failed, and it is better for the children's covers to be gentle on their bodies and for the elderly to be gentle on their bodies.
Then treat the position of the abdomen after three days with sugar until the fire of ash disappears, then treat it with other ointments until the wound is clean and the abdomen remains flat for forty days until the incision heals.
It is recommended that the patient's food be made for the duration of his treatment, so as not to expose his stomach during vomiting and purging. Then, if he wishes to continue after forty days, a tight bandage should be used for forty days more, which will reduce fatigue and fullness from food and drink, and severe coughing.
If this treatment is used thus completely, and may God help it, I will mention the treatment for the abscess in the next chapter, as for the abscess that occurs in the rest of the abdomen and was initial, if you want it not to exceed the prepared cavity according to its size, then... Let what burns the skin like half of it be treated as we mentioned, and may God help it, and some early writers suggested that the abscess should be drained with a triangular incision like this appearance.
After learning about the abscess with gauze and seeing the line that is horizontal on the side of the abscess and the other one descending from your hand in the middle with a single, smooth sickle, the first one is easier and better, if God wills.
The Sixth and Fortieth Chapter.
In what part of the text.
If a fracture or contusion occurs in some parts and the pain persists for a long time, and no remedy is effective in healing, it is better to apply a poultice of the point and make each part depend on its size, strength, weakness, and firmness.
And the pain and swelling from it, if it is from the first part, then remove it, otherwise reapply it because these pains often move from one part to another nearby, so it is better to follow up with the poultice until the affected person is free from pain.
The Seventh and Fortieth Chapter.
In what part of the bone does it occur?
As for the fractures, they benefit greatly from the poultice, especially the type of fracture that occurs due to the hardening of the bone marrow and the bones.
If you want to see the result, if the fracture is initial and treated as described in the division and it has not healed or stopped, and the affected person fears that corruption will seize all its moods, then apply the poultice to the head for five days. The first is in the middle of the forehead, the second below it towards the jaw at the end of the hair, two on the sides, and one behind the nail of the little finger, wrap your hand with a poultice of the point a little bit until it has an effect on the bone in a gradual way.
Remove the ribs to facilitate the expulsion of the thick waters from them and their molding, also on the same rod as what has been done so far, and if the bone has continued to grow on the heel and has shown clear signs, it is recommended to shape these parts that we mentioned in the head. Molds on the nose, two on the pharynx, two on the cheeks, one on the ears when the sinus is lacking, and another above it in the same plate, and two on the earlobes on each ear. Two on the thighs, one on each thigh, two on the prominences of the shoulders, and molding on all the bones of the fingers and toes of both hands and feet.
Preserve the nerve at the end of the thighs so as not to burn them, and a mold may be on the bone of the buttock, another on the stomach's mouth, and another on the liver, and know that as you shape it, it will be better and more effective.
Know that the heel does not find relief from pain as the correct one does for its body to be stiff, and it is recommended that the dressing be according to the size of the large and small members on the basis of the characteristics of the tendons.
Then, treat the patient with a thin gauze soaked in honey and other remedies until he is cured, if God wills.
The Eighth Chapter of the Fortieth Part.
In the case of gout, when a part of the body becomes inflamed and is treated with drugs, diet, and poultices, it does not heal unless the affected part is properly cared for according to its size or smallness, and it should be slightly soaked in the skin.
Then, treat it with ginger until it is cured, and some types of gout that affect the hand and foot may disappear in the grooves of the spine at the exit of the nerve that moves that part of the body.
This is not provided except by those who have knowledge of anatomy and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
The Ninth Chapter of the Fortieth Part.
In the case of scarlet fever.
If scarlet fever progresses and there is no relief in it, apply a poultice of a small amount on the affected part according to the skin's moisture until the white disappears and changes color.
Then, treat it with thin olive oil mixed with the oil of wormwood for the milk of pregnancy and the blood of the bath or the blood of the whitlow from each part, mix all together, and apply it to the sore until it is cured.
The 10th century Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis is a comprehensive work that covers various aspects of medical practice during the Islamic Golden Age. The excerpt you provided, " ," translates to "Chapter Fifty" in English. This chapter likely contains detailed instructions or discussions related to specific surgical procedures or topics within the broader context of Albucasis' textbook.
The excerpt " " translates to "How cancer be known" in English. This question likely refers to the identification, diagnosis, or understanding of cancer as it was known during Albucasis' time. The context of this question within the textbook would provide more specific information on how cancer was understood and approached in Albucasis' medical practice.
The excerpt "                                 " translates to "If cancer is early and you want to stop it, cut it off with a circular incision around it, as it rotates, and some rulers have mentioned that it should be cut deep in the middle, but I don't see that because I expect it to grow and I have seen that happen many times." This passage discusses the surgical approach to treating cancer during Albucasis' time. The text suggests that a circular incision around the tumor is a common method, and some scholars propose cutting deeper into the center of the tumor. However, the author expresses skepticism about this approach, as they have observed that cancer often grows despite such interventions.
The excerpt "         " translates to "Indeed, it should be cut around it as we have said or with many cuts." This statement reinforces the idea that cutting around the tumor is a recommended surgical approach for treating cancer. The author emphasizes the importance of this method and suggests that it can be performed using various techniques, such as multiple incisions or a single, larger cut around the tumor.
The excerpt "  " translates to "Chapter Forty-nine and fifty" in English. This chapter likely contains detailed instructions or discussions related to specific surgical procedures or topics within the broader context of Albucasis' textbook. The numbering of the chapters in this way could indicate a systematic organization of the content or a specific focus on certain surgical techniques in these particular chapters.
In the case of injuries to the face.
If an injury occurs to one of the cheeks, and it does not heal due to the lack of blood flow or time, and you want it to heal quickly, apply small, frequent applications.
Then leave it, as it will heal quickly if you want to make it more prominent, smooth the appearance of this one.
And place it in the center of the cheek until the skin is completely peeled, and then treat it with what is appropriate to remove it.
The second chapter and fiftieth section.
In the case of eating.
Eating is only a corruption that consumes the body as fire consumes iron. If you see eating in a position that could be like fire, smooth the appearance of many small and large pimples on it according to what suits that position.
Then smear it from all sides until the corruption is completely eliminated and nothing remains of it, then leave it for three days and apply the chalk powder mixed with oil to the dry areas until the scabies are completely removed and all the corruption.
Then she treats it with the applied dough of meat, and after three days I saw that the meat grew into a right plant without any corruption in it, or if there is still some corrupt area, she treats it with the strong medicine.
And that it is best to burn it quickly and I mentioned treating it with the strong medicine in the division and to take it from there when she gets angry with it.
The third chapter and the fiftieth.
In the inverted and non-inverted scales.
This is often spoken of in the sole of the foot, this thing that causes the man to itch, and in it there is either fire or hot water.
And as for the one that is fire, it is to make a mold similar to the spider's web of silver around the stone as much as possible on all sides and to make it thinly covered with the mold, then to put the mold on the stone and to turn your hand with the mold around the stone until the mold reaches the depth of the stone.
And to leave it for three days until it is dry, then to cover it with the potash made with salt and to leave the covering on it overnight because it will come off from its roots, then to treat the wound position with the meat dough that has grown into a plant until it is clean, if the scales are not inverted.
In many cases, on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, it is recommended to insert a glass or metal tube or even a giraffe's hoof into the cavity and pour boiling water until it runs out.
Then, keep your hand on the handle and slowly turn it with a little force so that the boiling water penetrates to the end of the cavity and the cold water gradually cools down the boiling water for about an hour.
Then, leave it and the bandage will be removed from its place, so you do this one by one until all of it comes out of the body and then treat the affected areas after the meat comes out of the wound.
The fourth and fifth chapter.
In the case of diarrhea.
If diarrhea occurs due to cold in the spinal cord or from a quarter of fever or otherwise, it is recommended to wrap four or five sheets on the back between each sheet and in the middle of each sheet. And on his stomach, wrap a sheet with olive oil, as the diarrhea subsides and speeds up the healing of the cold disease.
The 10th century Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis is a comprehensive guide to various medical procedures, including surgical operations and treatments for different diseases and injuries. The excerpt you provided, "  ," translates to "Chapter Five and Fifty" in English. This suggests that the textbook is organized into chapters, with each chapter covering a specific topic or range of topics related to medicine and surgery. The number fifty indicates that this particular chapter is the 50th chapter in the textbook.
The excerpt you provided, "     ," translates to "In what part of the body does the accident occur?" in English. This question is likely related to a specific surgical procedure or medical condition, and the answer would depend on the context of the textbook and the chapter being discussed.
The excerpt you provided, "                                   ," translates to "It may occur in the body as a cold, dry eruption caused by impure substances, and it is best to treat it on the head of each blister with a mild ointment made from rose oil, or with a piece of cotton soaked in hot water, or with a piece of gauze." This statement is likely providing medical advice or instructions for treating a specific skin condition or eruption. The author suggests using rose oil as an ointment, hot water as a soaking agent, or gauze as a dressing to treat the condition.
The excerpt you provided, "                           ," translates to "The vaccinia may first appear on this face and does not increase, but it benefits the patient and relieves him of the vaccine only if the vaccine is cleared by the fistula. It is best to do this after the fistula has been cleared." This statement is likely providing medical advice or instructions for using a vaccine or immunization treatment. The author suggests that the vaccine should be applied after the fistula has been cleared, and that it will benefit the patient and relieve them of any discomfort or side effects associated with the vaccine.
The 10th Century Arabic Textbook on Surgery by Albucasis, Chapter 65.
In the event of severe bleeding after cutting the cord.
It often happens that bleeding from the cord occurs when the cord is cut outside or during a wound or fracture, or in such cases, and it becomes difficult to cut it.
If such an event occurs, quickly reach for the cord's end with your thumb and press it firmly until the blood stops flowing and nothing comes out of it. Then place small and large oil lamps in the fire several times until they become very thick.
Then take one of them, either small or large, according to the wound and the position where the cord was cut, and place the ointment on the same color as your thumb after you remove your thumb and hold the ointment until the blood stops flowing.
For if you feel blood flowing when you lift your thumb from the cord's end and remove the ointment, take another piece of ointment from the hot oil and continue doing this with one after another until the bleeding stops.
And do not burn the nerve that is there, as it may cause another injury. Know that if blood flows from the cord, it cannot be cut and especially if the cord is large, either by one of four ways as we have said or by striking it if it has not been struck. When a wound has shrunk and the blood flow has ceased, either it should be stitched up with fine stitches, or medication should be applied that cuts the blood vessels and constricts the wound, constricting it firmly.
However, if someone attempts to cut it with a stitch or by cutting it with forceps or placing burning things therein, they will not be able to cut it without causing excessive bleeding unless the doctor is present and has provided medication. In that case, he should place his little finger on the mouth of the wound itself, as we have described.
It should be constricted as much as possible until the blood is completely blocked and it recedes from above the wound, the suture, and the finger. Do not wash it with cold water, which permanently freezes the blood, causing it to become harder and cut further during this process, and observe what medicine or remedy it needs.
The second chapter.
In the surgical procedures, operations, and suchlike.
In the first chapter, we mentioned that every disease can be cured by fire and burning drugs, their causes, remedies, instruments, images of the materia medica, and made it a part of the book from the foot to the head.
I am cutting this section according to the method described here, to make it easier for the student to understand.
Before I begin, it is important that you learn this, O children of the tribe, that this section contains the deception above what is in the first section of the book.
Therefore, it is important that the warning in this section be more severe because the operation in this section often leads to confusion of the blood that is present when opening a vein, incising an artery, or bisecting a gallbladder, or performing surgery, or removing a tumor, or incising a hollow organ, or suchlike, which all lead to fear and death.
I warn you of the danger of falling into deception in this profession, as it may happen to some people with different ailments, some of whom have fallen ill and died as a result.
The severity of the deception they find, the length of their illness, and the clarity of their death, and some of them who spend their money and sing to you for your health and their disease, it is not appropriate for you to help those who are in this group of people.
Let your caution be greater than your desire and desire, and do not rush to anything except after knowing for certain that it is safe with what will follow you, and use all the knowledge and warning in all the treatment of your diseases for safety.
In this, you have an aid to gaining praise and glory, honor and praise, and thanks and reward. May Allah guide you, O children of His chosen ones, and keep you away from what is forbidden and what brings confusion. Indeed, this is in His hands, and there is no deity but He.
This chapter is divided into sections according to what comes before in the chapter of what is past and future, so that you may not desire what you do not need. Indeed, if Allah wills.
The first section.
In the treatment of water that accumulates in the heads of children.
Indeed, this scum is often exposed to children at birth when the head of the child is forced without proper support and may also be due to hidden cause unknown.
I have not seen this cause in anyone but children, and all of them who died were the fastest to grow, so I saw that they left the work alone and I saw a child whose head was filled with water and the head grew every day. Until the child does not stand on his own due to the hardness of his head and the water increases until he dies.
And this water is either between the skin and the bone or under the bone on the skull, and the work in this case is if the water is between the skin and the bone and the tumor is small, it is better to make a single cut in the middle of the head with a width of about a foot until the water flows and this is the image of the cutter.
In case the moisture is more and the tumor is greater, make it a cross section on this image.
And if the moisture is below the skull and you see the cracks of the head open from all sides and water flows out when you press inside with your hand, but you don't notice that, it is recommended that you make a cross section in the middle of the head on this image.
After the section, all the moisture will come out, then the corners and notches will be sharp and the water will flow down from above with saliva and oil on the fifth day, then the gauze will heal and treat the wound with cataplasm and plaster and do not leave the head swollen and nourish the patient with dry food little in moisture.
To strengthen the organ and drain it, another recipe for the section is to look where the bone of the tumor appears and the water gathering because it may be in the back of the head more or at the beginning, or on the right side or the north.
You intend to cut where the tumor appears and the water gathering, you make a section on what you can and preserve that you cut a vein and there will be bleeding in the death of the patient from that bleeding with the drying of the moisture.
The second chapter.
Cut the two sutures known as the hemibasis.
If the incision on either side of the eye or the chest is deep and no improvement is seen after medication, cut these sutures.
It is recommended that if you wish to cut them, cut the tip of the gauze with iodine, then expose the suture by making a small incision, then pull the gauze with the help of a thread to see the suture, then look where the blood and the two positions behind the ears are, which were hidden in some people.
Then learn them with gut, then cut them with the scissors, which should be done in front of the skull, and if you want, insert the scissors from under the suture and cut it upwards with the cuts, making the length of the cuts about two fingers.
If the blood comes out when cut, it flows to the front and a continuous thread is wrapped around it. If the suture is not visible from the ear, it is recommended to learn from the ear with three fingers, then learn with gut and cut until the bone, which should be wrapped with a continuous thread.
From the blood, six factors are sent to the middle, possibly more or less according to the strength of the patient's constitution and the fullness of their veins. Then, look at the wound, for there will be something solid on the bone from the pus, which is then cut off.
To prevent the appearance of a hot swelling, then open the wound with a thin knife and dress it with cataplasm until it is clean.
The third section.
Tie the two strings that are in the knots.
If a man has a brother who is chronically ill or frequent miscarriages caused by dry heat and high fever in the muscles of the arm or neck or similar, and it does not improve with treatment, we have tried tying the strings from the knots in these diseases as described.
The operation is performed so that the string in the knots of the patient's arm and neck appears, and you can see the visible string in the chest. This indicates to you what is hidden in each person.
Or, when the cold is severe, make the patient bend his neck with the help of a shawl, then you can see the position by cutting or moistening the position with hot water until the string appears clearly and clearly. Then, the surgeon takes this appearance. Then, the surgeon scrapes the skin with it until it reaches the tendon, then inserts a needle into it and draws out all the threads from both sides of it, as the thread is thin, he pushes it with his thumb. Then, he cuts off a piece from it according to the distance between its two sides and does not cause bleeding as long as it has not been torn or cut, because if it had not been torn or cut, the blood had not entered at all. Then, he stops the bleeding from six veins to three.
If the thread is large, it should be tied in two places with a fine silk thread, so that the thread is either from Iberis or from Oudraki, otherwise the edge of the wound will rust before the wound is closed and bleeding will occur.
Then, he cuts the gauze between the tendons and does this either at that time or later, and if you want to sew it to the bone with a soft cloth until its edges turn white, this operation is done by itself or better as we said.
However, if it is hot or has a bad temper because the oil causes the moisture to evaporate, it will be harmful to the wound, and it is recommended after cutting the tendons to scrape the site with a sharp knife and place the straight pins on it, then apply the remedies consisting of cheap drugs that produce meat and the flesh until it is cleaned, if God willing.
When a bleeding occurs during your work, proceed to cut the vessel either way and then tie your hand until the blood stops flowing. If nothing happens, use your thumb to stop the bleeding.
Then cool the area with very cold water until it becomes numb and hard, and then wrap the artery with gauze after you have learned to tie the knots with the thread.
Then put on a thick glove until it reaches the bone and stop the bleeding at two points so that it does not mix with this piece of cloth, and this is the shape of the bandage.
The string should be as thin as the two small strings but less hard because if they were both thin, they would freeze faster and the meat would not cool down quickly, so if there is some thickness in them, it will be hot inside.
Cut the meat quickly, and this work is better than all other works and easier, and make sure there is some thickness between the strings and the thumb.
The fourth chapter.
In the treatment of severe, persistent diarrhea causing blindness in both eyes.
If the diarrhea was constant and the stool was from the forehead outside, and there was no improvement with any medical treatment, I saw the face of the patient had turned red. And he had a red beard like a rat's beard, and his eyes were swollen and watery, as if they had consumed something and their corners had been swelled by the tears. At first, in treating him, it was necessary to do this operation, and it is called the treatment of shaving, which is to order the beard that is on his chin.
Then, three notches are made on the chin, parallel to the tip of the first notch, which is about the length of the middle phalanx of the finger in the middle of the chin, and the second one a little further from the movement of the abdominal muscle in the chest, and the third one from the other side.
And keep the two strings that are on both sides and keep your hand away from the nails, and after each notch, make three fingers flat, and have ready for you sharp knives or many cuts that will let the blood flow.
Then enters the sharp-handed surgeon with both hands extended. Then, from the middle finger to the middle of the hand, he scrapes all the skin between the fingers with the blade, and then does the same from the middle finger to the third finger. Then, this surgeon exits. And, she enters the first finger with another device called a sharp blade from one side and a smooth blade from the other side. This is its appearance:
And, it appears as if the sharp side is facing the meat attached to the skin and the smooth side is facing the bone, and she pushes it until it reaches the middle finger and cuts all the veins that flow from the head to the eyes without the cuts reaching the surface of the skin.
Then, she does the same from the middle finger to the other finger, and after the moderate amount of blood has oozed out, she puts a cloth with a wet edge on each finger and pours some wine and oil or honey and oil on it.
To prevent a hot wound and on the third day, the bandage is removed and the long suture is used with plenty of water. Then, it is treated with the Basilicon ointment with rose and other things that are treated in surgeries until it is clean by God's will.
The 10th Century Arabic Textbook on Surgery by Albucasis: Chapter 5
In treating tears and discharges from the inner side of the eyes from within the head.
When one of the discharges was a heavy, irregular, and continuous one, which was seen in both eyes to be divided into two small parts, and their vision had become weak, and their eyelids were swollen, and the tears were falling from them. And that it is deep and severe pain, and continuous, and one should know from these symptoms that these materials and discharges are only from many deep veins, and the best treatment in this case is this treatment, which is to order the patient to tie a knot in his thigh, then to cut a single slit in the middle of the knot.
And that it is deep and severe pain, and continuous, and one should know from these symptoms that these materials and discharges are only from many deep veins, and the best treatment in this case is this treatment, which is to order the patient to tie a knot in his thigh, then to cut a single slit in the middle of the knot. Or lift it slightly on the side, and start cutting from the right ribs to the left ribs, and the cut should be to the bone and your hand should be far away from the moving muscles of the arm until when the bone breaks and all the blood is washed out with the esfnj.
Then separate the scar by using mercury or a mixture of cat's hair, and then raise it with the needles and wet the needles with wine and oil to prevent the burn from becoming hotter, and when the burn is healed and you see that the hot burn has disappeared, it is best to open the bone until the growth of meat begins.
Then it is treated with dry fomentation similar to taking flour from the fire and from the potash four parts and from them a mortar is made and it is used in the growth of meat in such surgical operations.
The sixth chapter.
In the treatment of what falls into the ear.
All that falls into the ear may be one of four kinds, either a metallic substance or something resembling a stone like copper and glass, or a plantlike substance such as henbane and nutmeg, and so on, and something like water and saliva and so on.
And if it is a part of an animal that does not grow in the ear, receive it in the ear with the sun and if you see only grease in it, then try to remove it by moving the head or using the candle. And block the holes with a gauze or cotton wool and put it around the ear and push the ear up, this treatment is used often and if it does not come out, try to remove it with the soft gauze that has this appearance.
If it comes out with the gauze and if not, try to remove it with a thin copper tube and insert one end of the tube into the ear hole yes.
Tie the tube with polished thread oil so that wind does not find another way through the tube, then draw it towards the wind with a strong and often successful pull. If it does not come out as described and you do not have any other recourse, take some of your own feces or some of the softened dung taken by the bird, put it in the corner of the mouth.
After washing it with a clean cloth, then insert it into the ear hole firmly after drying the ear, if it does not come out completely as described, proceed to cut before the tumor becomes hot or inflamed.
Description of the cut to remove the hemorrhoid from the anus first, and it will leave the hemorrhoid through the blood on the strength of its power, then place the hemorrhoid between your hands and bend the ear upwards and make a small cut in the ear at the place where it was inflamed.
The cut should be a crescent-shaped until it reaches the end, then remove it with what you can from the tools, and quickly scrape the cut from your hand, and treat it until it is cleared.
And if something fell into the ear from one of the grains that grows and swells, try to remove it as we mentioned, but if you cannot, then take a soft, fine smelling oil on this image.
Try to remove these grains of sand that have fallen into the ear, but only if you are sure that they have been moistened by the ear's steam until they become many small pieces, then remove them with a curette or a gentle nail or a soft pencil.
As we mentioned, it is easier to remove them, and as for the water inside the ear, it is recommended that the cotton-tipped applicator with the perforated container or first fill the ear with something from the clean linen and place it on that ear in which there is water, and then withdraw it.
Or, take small pieces of nail file and heat them over a little fire, then insert one of them into the ear hole and hold it on one side of the ear with your hand and strike another stone against the stone inside the ear.
And he will continue to do this with a nail file until all the water is removed, and the water may be taken from the cold or the comb and one end of it is inserted into the ear, and the other end is heated over the fire until it burns more of it, then another comb is reused.
Perform the incision several times until all the water comes out or is drawn by the catheter as it advances in the section, and as for removing the internal animal from within it, observe that if it is a small corpse like a mouse and about it as mentioned in the division, and the rest.
If the corpse is large and appears to the eye, try removing it with your hands and nails, and order it to be easiest of all that can happen in the ear, and as for removing the puppy born in the ear if it was treated as mentioned in the division in the chapter of the kittens, and the treatment did not help.
It is recommended that you look at the ear in the sun, if something appears from it, remove it with your hands or with a sharp needle, and if nothing appears from it, take this catheter as it appears.
Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, insert the thin side of the ear into the ear as much as possible, then press it with a strong pressure until all the puppy comes out, if you do not need to exit, close around the catheter with cotton as mentioned in the section.
If nothing comes out as mentioned, try the kittens that were tried in the first place to kill the puppy and find that this is in the chapter of the kittens, it is your thumb and medicines in the ear with this device and take its appearance:
She appears to be made of a crown or a thin metal base, with a large flat piece on top, and if you wish, the piston inside the pipe could be made of a fine metal, and if you take a strip of it and curve it into a U-shape, it would be fine.
Then pour the oil or ointment or the medicine of your choice into the pipe and put it in the ear, then insert the strip with your thumb gently pressing it until the oil flows into the inner part of the ear and spreads.
Put the oil inside, and make sure that what you put in the ear is not too hot or too cold, as the ear cannot tolerate this.
The seventh chapter.
In the treatment of the deviated septum of the ear.
Some children may have a deviated septum in their mothers' noses and uncurved ears.
And some people may have a deviated septum in the nose of the ear due to an injury or fatty tissue in it, and this deviated septum may be in the depth of the crown of the ear that cannot be seen with the eye.
And it may protrude slightly and be seen with the eye, but the one that is hidden in the depth of the ear and cannot be seen with the eye is more difficult to see, and the one that can be seen with the eye should be placed in the sun for the ear. Look at it, I saw the valve visible, open it with a gentle pointed instrument like this is its image:
Its side has some limited exposure, some of the instruments should be inserted on one side to avoid damaging the ear, if the valve is made of meat that grew in the ear's channel, capture it with a gentle forceps and cut it deeply until all the meat is removed.
If the valve is deep in the ear, take a gentle pointed instrument, warm it slightly in fire, then insert it into the ear channel, if you feel the valve with what the patient feels of heavy weight in the ear, remove it with force.
And protect from cutting the ear nerve, then insert a thin wire in the ear until it fills the hole in the Egyptian tube, do this days until the wound heals or take out the wire and dip it in water and apply ointment on it.
And use it if the ear appears to have swollen and inflamed, it is better to remove the wire and replace it with another one that has been inserted in a wound made of gum until the inflamed part is healed and then treat it to remove it.
When there is a sudden bleeding from the ears, either due to cold water or a fracture, place it on the ear and apply other treatments mentioned in the article for stopping the bleeding in the cases of wounds.
The Eighth Chapter.
In the treatment of the abscesses that appear in the ears.
These abscesses that appear in the ears may be soft and white, and it is recommended to cover them with a bandage or a sponge and cut them from their roots using scissors, then place a dressing with a medicated substance on the site.
And if the bleeding from it is blood from its roots, mix with a thin ointment and apply it after cutting, and most of the time it returns if there is something left of its roots, but if it burns, it has burned its roots and no longer exists.
The Ninth Chapter.
In the treatment of the cold in the ears.
Often there is something that resembles the cold in intensity and firmness in the ears.
Therefore, it is called the cold and it is a gathering of watery heat in the upper and lower ear canals, and the treatment in it is to look at whether the cold is prominent in the appearance of the ear, and it moves to all sides if it is easy, then cut off its side with a sharp blade.
He then cuts it from all sides until it is completely severed, then ties it with threads and cuts it. If it does not heal after cutting, it is better to leave it alone until the growth is completely removed by cutting. If the split is large, it should be sewn together and treated until it is completely healed.
If it is small, there is no problem with it, but the graft must be pressed and soaked. If the split faces inward towards the inner surface of the growth, turn the growth and tie the split with threads without needing to sew it together and remove it from all sides.
If the growth is completely removed by cutting, it does not cause any harm. Then clean the eye with salt water after cutting the split and treat the area until the graft is healed.
The tenth chapter.
In the treatment of the sunken eye in the growth.
The sunken eye is a swelling that occurs in the layers of the growth above and is more common in children, as it weighs down their eyes and causes them to have nightmares and be unable to see the light of the sun. To make the tears flow faster.
They are always lying on their faces and sleeping, with their arms under their ribs, which are moistened by breathing and the expansion of the chest. When you adjust the position with your fingers, you feel the chest between them. The purpose of the operation is for the surgeon to place his head on the stone you hold.
Then, she takes a sharp bone and makes a circle around the chest from all sides, then places it on the chest and turns it with her fingers from all sides to gather the chest in the middle of the circle.
Then, she scarifies the moisture in the middle with the scalpel, making a cut that is not wider than the one made in the flank and, in the depth, it is recommended to scarify the entire skin until it reaches the chest.
In most cases, the chest is more visible than the cut on a white fatty piece due to scarification, which attracts it with a blade that has lifted it between your fingers and outwards. Your right hand and north side are used to remove it, being careful not to increase the cut so that the scalpel does not hurt the eye.
If the chest does not appear in the initial cut, it is recommended to slightly increase the cut a little until the chest appears, then scarify it as we described earlier, then place it on the position and secure it with a pin, and some people use salt to dry it.
He places the dressing in the center of the wound to absorb the remaining moisture, then treats it until it is clean. If an injury occurs in the area, he applies a comfortable bandage until it is clean.
The 12th chapter.
In the measurement of the eyelid.
If inflammation occurs in the eyelid, excess fluid accumulates outside the natural pathway of the natural tears and swells, which can cause eye problems such as constant tearing, eye strain, whiteness, and cloudiness until it becomes a reason for the closure of the eye.
The eyelid inflammation can be on four sides, either by heat or by the strong medicine that is given in the eye chamber, or it can be cut and trimmed or by the scissors as I remember.
It is recommended that you make the tip of the needle in your stone and then bend the eyelid with your left hand, if it bends or else insert a thread into it from the bottom of the eyelid and withdraw the thread from above and it should be close to the same hair and attract the thread upwards along the eyelid.
Then bend it and pull the thread through the eyelid without the extra hair of the shaved piece from the root to the smallest root, then stitch the thread and put a small piece of cloth or rag under the eyelid, then learn on the eyelid with the glue.
The shape of the scalpel should be according to what you want to raise the skin, as some people may need to cut a certain amount of skin that is appropriate based on how much the skin has been relaxed.
And some people may need to cut less of that according to how much the skin has been relaxed, then the surgeon should use the scalpel blade on the lines that have been taught and start from the largest toe to the smallest toe, and one cut should be close to the natural hair like a small mustache.
Then the scraper should enter into one of the corners of the skin, then it should be sucked out completely, then the stitches should be made using fine silk thread and a thin needle, and the excess material should be removed and some threads should be tied on the handles with some things that are neat.
I wanted you to do this and if not, what will you do? Then the stitches and threads will remain for about three days or four, and then it will be treated, and if you left the wound without stitches, it will be treated with something that relieves and closes it, because the skin rises when the wound is closed and tied and the stitches are better.
This is the first face of the saw, which was mentioned earlier but has a smooth edge and is good for working with, with no risk involved. Another face in the saw is to learn from the ribs, shaped like the shape of an ash paper, as we have described. Then raise the ribs with three saws, which are either split or a group on this image.
Then cut what is left of the ribs with a small saw on this image, cutting evenly.
If you cannot hold the saws and do not have a vice, use a hook in the saw and insert it into the middle of the shape, and insert another hook near the largest groove and another one near the smallest groove. Tie the hooks between your fingers evenly, then raise the saw with your hand raised gently.
And raise the curved skin all as we have described, then tie the edges of the wound with thread and treat it until it is clean, because the edge or rim of the tumor becomes softer when cutting or shaving, so you can soften that tumor with the soft scar tissue.
And the lower saw may also bend its scars, so it is recommended to use what we have mentioned of cutting, tying, and heating with fire and strong drugs, and heating or strong drugs in heating and cutting and cutting, and make them less visible from the ties and threads.
The translation of the excerpt from the 10th century Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis is: "The incision in the abdomen is made in this manner, which involves bending the muscle and then passing through it as described. Then, two or three thin strips of wood are created, with their length equal to the length of the muscle and their width less than the width of a hand.
The translation of the excerpt from the 10th century Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis is: "Then, I passed the threads through the sides of both sides where they stuck, and then gathered them gently on the eyeball tissue and tightened the strips from both sides, making them thin and long, and left them for a few days because the dead and sweating skin turns black.
The translation of the excerpt from the 10th century Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis is: "Until it falls by itself, if it is deeply embedded in the tissue, then treat it until it comes out. If the scar raises the muscle and does not close the eye sockets, and this is the appearance of the strips made in this way and this size in length and width:
The translation of the excerpt from the 10th century Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis is: "Chapter Twelfth.
The translation of the excerpt from the 10th century Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis is: "When lifting the raised eyeball skin with the forceps.
The translation of the excerpt from the 10th century Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis is: "If the eyeball skin is raised and works, then use a thin forceps to enter it with a thin thread made of fine wool, then tie the ends and fasten it with a gentle knot as tight as possible, and make the thread long enough to be like a thumb.
The surgeon then places another fine thread in the socket, bending its ends as desired. Then, the operator places his head on the stone and waits for the sun to be at the right angle to perform the work, as the work is precise. Then, the forceps enter the excess hair through the socket.
Then, it is pulled through the socket with the wheel until it emerges above the natural hair. Then, the thread is drawn up over the sockets and enters the socket that hair if it is one or two or three or more.
Then, pull it with your hand until the hair emerges from the socket with the sockets and the natural hair if you pulled the sockets down with the thread that you were tied in and did not pull the sockets out with it until you pulled the threads down from the highest pin.
Then, pull the hair back and pull it up until it rises in the highest pin and you see it with your eye. When that happens, the sockets and the threads are loosened and removed from the eye and left open for a day or three until the hair is in its place and meat grows on it.
If the hair is short, either add long hair from the natural hair and it will rise with it, or leave it until it grows on its own after some time, and then raise it.
The 10th century Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis is titled "The Thirteenth Chapter." Please provide the specific excerpt you would like translated for a more accurate response.
The thirteenth chapter deals with treating the female patient who has swelling in the upper eyelid.
This condition is known as a ranula and can be either primary or secondary, with the secondary type being caused by excess secretion from a previous wound, scar, or similar.
The objective of the operation is to drain the excess fluid and separate the wound edges, allowing a layer of cartilage to form between them, which should eventually be removed. It is not recommended to use drying or constricting substances in the treatment.
If you perform this procedure, the swelling will worsen and you should avoid using substances that run like honey and tamarind, such as ginger and water that has been boiled with cartilage and dried with almond and fried with it, as it may cause infection.
The treatment should be approached with caution to avoid damaging the area that was previously operated on, and this procedure is only a part of the surgical repair and should not return the area to its original state.
Chapter Fourteen.
In the treatment of a woman who is in the lower abdomen.
This woman, whose true name is the truth, is a hysterectomy and is natural and is prolapse, and prolapse is from incision or cut or like that.
The method of operating is to take a needle with a fine thread and sew it in the meat and pull it out from the left side to the right side until the thread is in both sides then close the meat with the needle and cut it with a wide blade.
If the shape of the abdomen returns to what it should be, or else take a gusset and place it on the site of the hernia, bend the abdomen with it and cut two incisions in the inner side of the abdomen and the sides of the incisions will be from the points of the cuts that were cut until they meet then they will be from them. Until it becomes like this shape:
And it is the Greek letter, then remove that meat as much as the lower side of it below the abdomen, then close the separated parts with two strips sewn with a silk thread, then treat it as we mentioned in the female remedies and the pessary until it comes out.
When the thigh is exposed from the hip or the groin, it is best to make a simple incision without removing the hair of the surrounding area, then divide the two ends with a blunt finger as we have mentioned.
If the thigh is affected above or below, the operation should be performed according to what suits the nature of the varix. For it may be very different in appearance, and the surgeon must choose the best way to close it.
Until the shape returns to its natural state or approaches it, and the same disease indicates what is suitable for the work and instruments in most cases.
The 14th chapter.
In the traction of the eyelid by the mallet or the chisel.
This operation may be known to many people as the mallet closes the upper eyelid with white of the eye to prevent its easy movement and obstruct its natural actions, so it is best to enter a finger under the eyelid.
And lift it up or extend it with a hook, then cut the traction with a gentle blade not sharp but slightly thick so that the hook does not bother the eye during the work and you do not have to cut the hook too much, and your cut will be enough to close the traction.
Until the glass recovers its natural position and separates from the eye, a saline solution is instilled into the eye to cleanse it or to separate the shaven Zangaree from its surface. Then, it is divided between the glass and the eye by a thin thread.
A slice of egg white is placed above the eye, and after the third day, the shaved blades are used until it is cleaned.
The 13th section.
In cutting the meat and roasting the legs.
The meat is either nervous and resembles a hard, thin cloth, or it is not nervous and resembles dry white paste when touched with copper or broken, it has been taken by the scalpel.
The scalpel has not been proven in it, and both types start from the largest meat to gradually cover the eye until the light is blocked and the movement of the eye, and the work in cutting it is to place the handle of the scalpel at the bottom of your stone.
Then, open your eyes and lift the meat with your hand, then grip the meat with a small scalpel and pull it up, then take a horsehair or cow hair and twist it strongly and slightly pull it in the middle of the meat.
The excerpt is translated as follows: "She is performed by the forceps and tied with a silk thread and extended to the top and wound around the hair on the side opposite the incision as if spreading it all the way to the other side, then cutting the rest at the end of the abdomen using a sharp blade or a small one, and the liver is removed naturally.
The excerpt is translated as follows: "So that the bleeding does not appear, and the silk thread has been extended alone or with the hair as we said, then it is wound around the soft blade of the scissors as shown in the image.
The excerpt is translated as follows: "And to prevent the blade from getting stuck in the abdominal wall and causing further injury, then after cutting it receives something from salt or from zinc ointment and leaves it until the next day and then treats it with what is appropriate to remove it.
The excerpt is translated as follows: "If the silk thread is not nervous and could not be inserted with forceps or held with scissors, this type of silk thread is often treated with medications to remove it as described in the division, and if you want to cut it, open the eye of the needle.
The excerpt is translated as follows: "And take a soft blade with a weak cut on this image: Perform the extraction of the turbidity above with gentleness, for I saw that it is flickering and trembling, and the effect of the turbidity is to reduce the eye's power from a half hour in the eye of the green Zanjari or the red Zanjari, or the salt of a powder, to a single moment.
Then, apply it to the eye until all of it has gone, except if you resist in the eye and make a hot flame, leave it and treat the hot flame until it comes out, then apply the ointment with gentleness until it comes out, and as for the limb of the mango.
If the ointment causes the eye to ache, it is bitter, then tie it with a string and cut some of it, do not look at the cut, otherwise it will cause tears to flow, then apply it to the red or green Zanjari until it comes out.
The 17th chapter.
In cutting the mango and what comes out of the excess meat in the eye.
Some people's eyes may have come out red fat, mixed until it covers the eye or approaches or flows over the eyelids, maybe the eyelids have turned outside and resembles the rind of the mango.
The physician places the patient's head in the stone, then opens his eyes and grasps all of the red meat with the suitable tweezers for that.
Or hold it by the jaw or the tail, then cut the first piece until it is all cut and preserved for the eye to avoid hurting it during the work, and your cut can be either with the scissors we described in the cutting of the thigh or with small tweezers. Like the one that grasps it with the ropes as it appears in the window to this side of this window.
If your cut goes through all the veins, fill the eye with the dissolved salt or sprinkle some red and similar medicines in it and hold a piece of white egg on the outside to prevent the growth of the hot ulcer.
If something remains of the veins, the blood prevails over the ulcer and you are afraid of the hot ulcer, leave the eye and treat it with what keeps the ulcer calm, then repeat the work until it is clean and also make from the excess meat that is exposed in this type.
But it is recommended that you avoid treating all weak eyes by writing or by working with iron and do not put your hand in anything of these workers until you see that this organ is suitable for this work.
The 10th century Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis is a significant historical work in the field of medicine. The excerpt provided, "  ," translates to "Chapter Eighteen" in English. This chapter likely contains detailed information on various surgical procedures and techniques, as Albucasis was a renowned physician and surgeon during the Islamic Golden Age.
The excerpt "    " translates to "In the case of a splint from the eye" in English. This suggests that Albucasis is discussing the use of splints or supportive devices in relation to the eye, possibly in the context of treating eye injuries or conditions.
The excerpt "                  " translates to "The splint is red and sticks to the eye, preventing sight and weakening the eye over time. It is advisable for you firstly not to look." This suggests that Albucasis is advising the reader not to look directly at the eye if it has a red, sticking splint, as this could potentially cause further damage or weaken the eye. The author may be recommending that the person seeks medical attention instead.
The excerpt "                            :" translates to "Therefore, the splint is that you order the patient to place their head in your basin, then secure the splint with one or two cords according to your preference, and the cords should be soft and comfortable on this image." This appears to be a set of instructions for securing a splint to the eye using cords, with the number of cords and their softness being adjustable based on the patient's comfort. The author may be providing guidance on how to properly apply and secure the splint to ensure the patient's comfort and safety.
Two spinal columns in one body, as shown in this image:
Then, gently grasp the arteries with a fine forceps and remove them, allowing the blood to flow out until it completely drains. Preserve your eye from being harmed by the sides of the forceps, and work half the day in the sun's direction.
And ensure that your work is thorough to avoid cutting anything other than the arteries during your break. If you cannot cut all of it in one hour, close the eye with whatever is comfortable for the eye's pain.
Leave it for days until the eye's pain is healed and the tumor becomes calm, then redo the work on this side of the eye until this image of the forceps is completely removed from it.
Leave it [with the handle of the forceps in the corner of the eye and the tip pointing towards the front and back, with the original position of the work] as the original position of the work so that you can open the eye with fixed or triangular handles that hold it, like a model.
Be careful, the handle of the forceps is in the corner of the tumor and the tip points towards the front and back, with the original position of the work. You can open the eye with fixed or triangular handles that hold it, like a model. If you prefer, start by removing two spinal columns from the upper part of the eye, with one in the lower part of the vitreous and the other in the first.
She should hold it between the middle and the tail, then tie threads from under them. Then she should hold it between the knuckles and the little finger, and gently lift all the threads until they are even with the smallest toe on the western side, whether it's with the thumb or the little finger.
The patient should lie on his stomach and pull the threads all the way up until they rise on the chest, without cutting the thread, because if you cut it, the blood and sweat will stain (dirt) on you.
Then cut the excess from above and below, leaving only the tail in the corner, if you can raise it from the corner, pull it with your hand, it's better and may please some people.
If you cut it, the knot was loose and it was comfortable for her to bear her pain and the burning tumor, then rework on it.
The ninth section.
Turn the rag to the nose.
The surgeons call it a gauze rag, if they treat it with fire or acid, as described in the description and it was not cleansed, there is no use in it except that you should rub it on the tumor when it is soft and extract all the moisture that is in it or the dryness.
Until the bone is exposed, and you see in it either corruption or redness, then remove it with this instrument's shape:".
And it is called the rasp, made of Indian iron, with a rounded head like a hammer that has been struck by a hammer strike, or the filing, with a fine strike. It is placed on the corruption of the bone, then it is rasped between your fingers, and you slightly cover your hand until you learn that this corruption has been healed.
And you do it several times, then compress the position with purgative pills that have been swallowed. If the position closes and fat appears in it, and the time has passed, and it remains for forty days and nothing happens to it, neither does it return nor is there any accident.
Know that it is cured, or else there is no other remedy except to turn the nail towards the nose point on this side, and it is to expose the bone twice with iron or with a strong medicine. If the bone is exposed, take a poultice on this side.
The iron nail should be like a triangle, with its tail wrapped around the same side. It should be placed on the bone itself, and it should be close to the ear but far from your eye slightly. Then cover your hand with the poultice until the bone is exposed and the wound is healed.
When the air escapes from the nostril if one holds the hand on the nose, then the position is forced by the absorbent dry drugs as I informed you, and if the meat hardens and the place is closed, then the material that was inserted outside returns to the nostril, which is better than the application.
The 10th chapter.
Description of the eyeball.
If the eye is diseased and there is no loss of vision, it is better to delay the operation and then remove the eyeball from its socket, without making an incision, and squeeze a thin mucus.
Then place on the eye a poultice made of cloths, wax, and ginger, and wrap the eye with it from above on the conjunctiva with many nails, and the recipe for the nails is to make them burn brightly and strike each one of them with four fingers made of it.
Then place one on top of the other according to what is needed for the eye, then press it with a strong and firm nail and replace the mucus from without making an incision, and leave the eye open for a day and night.
When the tendon relaxes during that, it should be pressed firmly, then removed after one or two nights, as we said, if I see the eye has returned, or else, re-tie the knot and the buckles, the clamps, and the shutters until the eye returns.
The chapter is the thirtieth.
In cutting the onions.
If the tendon is exposed in the onion layer, then it should be wrapped and becomes visible outside the eyelids like the onion, causing the human image to appear as such. Therefore, it should be cut. The work in this regard is as I described.
And it is that a probe should be inserted into the onion from the bottom to the top, then another probe should be inserted into it with a fine thread from the neck and pull it out, and the first probe should be placed on its condition.
Then, the knot should be cut at the position of the fine thread and tied around the onion with some onions surrounding the probe, it should be pressed firmly, then the probe is removed and a plate is placed on the eye covered with egg white, and the threads are allowed to fall with the onion, then the eye is treated with what strengthens it.
Until the wound is cleaned, and the onion may break from all sides with a circular crack until the eye becomes red, then it should be tied with a thin thread that reaches the corner of the eye, so that the white moisture is drained and the eye is washed and lies on the ground, then it should be pressed firmly until it is cleaned.
The second and thirtieth chapter.
In the treatment of the abscess.
This is called the abscess, but it is not similar to water that drips, and the operation involves placing the pincer on a fixed board, then taking the head of the nose with your hands from both sides.
And move it until you see the time extending downwards from your eye, then fix it and do not remove it, and if it does not extend downwards, we know that it is water, and if it does not become calm as we have mentioned, then the time has not extended downwards.
Or else, place the pincer between your hands, then gently scrape it over the corneal membrane a little at the contact of the rinse with the corneal membrane in the tube until the material comes out.
If water is only seen in the eye, it may be honey mixed with hot water or honey and ghee, then treat with other remedies until it is cleared.
The third and thirtieth chapter.
We have mentioned the types of water in the division and which one is suitable for the vessel by a simple, explainable phrase, then it should be taken from there for health, so at that time, it is recommended that you place the pincer between your hands with a slope towards the light near the sun.
Correct the eye and strengthen it with a good force, then raise the eyelid of the eye using your right hand if the left eye has water or your left hand if the right eye has water.
Then place the incision close to the eyelid bulb with a deep groove in the same white of the eye from the smallest side, then push the incision forcefully and you will move it with your hand until it passes through the white of the eye and you will feel the incision has reached something empty.
It is recommended that you consider the distance that the incision can reach from the white of the eye to the outer edge of the sclera, which is the eyelid, as it is seen by the same observer who looked at the eye for whitening the cornea, then consider the incision to be above to the position where the water is.
Then close it once or twice, as the water flows out of its hourglass, and the eye sees what opens to its sight from its hourglass, and the incision in the eye remains a little while, and the water does not flow out.
If it remains still and does not rise, then remove the incision slowly with your hand a little at a time, and it will dissolve in the water something pure from the inside, and clean the eye with it, and then put all of it outside the eye, either wrapped in cloth or covered with a bandage.
Extract and clear the white of the egg and tie it with the correct eye, and as for us and our contemporaries, we place ground cinnamon with egg whites on it, if you do not want to dilate the eye due to its stiffness because some people have very stiff eyes. It is recommended that the examiner, known as the ophthalmologist, should take this appearance.
It is recommended to insert the speculum yourself only and do not worry about the insertion, but rather you should approach the speculum in a gentle manner, then insert the speculum as we mentioned, and after completing your work, you should lie down on your back in a dark room and sleep.
It will stop all movements, vomiting, and make his food taste like its natural state, and his neck will not turn to the right or left, and the sutures will remain in that state until the third day, then it is placed in that dark room and its vision is tested.
It is then removed and the sutures are removed on the seventh day, and it is not recommended to do this during treatment or after the operation, but rather it should be avoided before the water rises quickly due to intense observation.
When the eye is exposed to a hot wound, it is best to cover it before the seventh day and adjust it according to what is inside the wound until it is completely filled. Then, the eye should be uncovered and a veil should be placed on the face under the eye that covers it for days while in that dark house.
He gradually leaves the house and acts according to his reasons, and know that learning does not neglect the student from seeing many times in this case he presents work, and I heard from some Iraqis that he mentions making a wet sponge in Iraq that absorbs water.
I have not seen anyone make this in our country, nor have I read it in a book of the early books, and it may be a fable, and this is a picture of the types of sponges that can be used for this, despite their ignorance of them.
It is made of copper specifically and has this sharp edge on one side like a saw blade.
Chapter Fourteen and Twentieth.
In the treatment of dried meat in the nose.
It may grow in the nose from different types of dried meat, something similar to many-legged spiders, and from it there may be a cancerous tumor that is protruding like a lamp wick, and from it there may be a non-luminous fat.
If there is any of these meats that are not sinful and not cancerous, it is recommended that you place the knife between your thumb and index finger, open the sheath, and insert the blade into the meat, then draw it out from the same side, cutting off what you perceive.
Until you learn that all meat is roasted, if there remains something from it that you cannot cut, burn it with one of the smooth tools until nothing remains of it, for your blood or warmth is abundant.
If it is necessary or from the forbidden parts, cut it immediately until the blood stops flowing, and all meat will pass through the nose after cutting, then take a sip of water or drink from it, for when you open your nose, moisture flows to the neck.
Know that it is cured, if not, know that the inside of the meat has rotted in the upper parts of the broken ribs that the tool has not reached with the cuts therein, then it is necessary to take a piece of cat's whiskers from it.
And tie it with many knots, and between each knot make the size of a finger or less, and the knife will twist the tip of one of its hairs in your nose by sweat or whatever can be made like a zer and attracts air until it reaches the gums.
A man named Albucasis wrote a 10th-century Arabic textbook on surgery. In this book, he explains the process of tying a knot with a thread, which is often used by writers and is easy for those who want to do it. Then, he describes how to gather the two ends of the thread, one that came out of the mouth and the other that remained in the nose.
Then, she uses a tie made of meat on the thread that was done until she learns that the meat has been cut by the thread knot. Then, the thread comes out of the nose after wiping away the blood that it drank in the Egyptian bath. She does this for three days or more.
Until the Egyptian bath has eaten all that remains of the meat, then another thing appears in the nose, a lead pipe for several days until it is removed, as it needs a treatment to dry and has used this.
This is a picture of the suction device that cuts the adhan and drugs in the nose.
He puts a piece of gold or silver, like the small cordage, into the open vessel and hangs it from it.
If you want to make the pipe closed like a pipe and make the suction device smooth,
It has a clamp at the end so that it holds it if it is melted in it with the grease or whatever you want from the ointments or the things that are stringy.
The fifth and twentieth chapter.
In the ninth cavity of the nasal passage.
Frequently, a swelling appears in the nasal passage and increases with time until it becomes prominent.
Therefore, it is recommended to cut the swelling as soon as it appears and remove all of them. Then, either place a plaster or a corrosive drug on the site, depending on the nature of the swelling, if it is hard and thick like the color of the nail, little by little.
Do not expose it to copper because it is a cancerous growth and often, when cutting this growth, a large wound remains on the patient. If the growth is not the meatus, but looks like the color of the nail, you can cut all of them. Remove the swelling without hesitation and without fear, and treat the site with something that relieves and draws until it is completely removed.
The sixth and thirtieth chapter.
In the closure of the nose, ear, and ear. If the connection is broken from the wound or in the same way, know that when the connection is broken in any of these noses, what is done in them does not help but in some people.
When it is necessary to expose something of that part, it is advisable to look if the wound is long and deep in his flesh, then collect the edges of the wound with the suture and treat it until it is clean, and if the connection has been separated and became a correct wound, each part should be cleansed with the edge of his visible skin until it bleeds.
Then collect the edges of the wound with the suture, tighten it, and gum it with a mixture of gum resin and frankincense, and place a bandage above the stitches using the gum of the mastic tree or another type of hard gum, and leave it uncovered for one or three days, then close it.
And change the drug and leave it until the threads cut themselves, then treat them with gum until they are clean, the description of the suture is that it joins the separation of the connection either by stitching as we described in abdominal sutures or by thread as you have seen here.
The seventh and twentieth chapter.
In the removal of the nail that is exposed in the wounds.
Many people may have small, hard nails inside their mouths that resemble some of them to the shape of coral and others are smaller and larger, it is advisable to open the gum and pass over each nail and tie it with a thread.
The excerpt translates to: "Cut from both sides, then close the position with a piece of gauze until the blood stops, and then apply ointment to the affected area, treating the wounds until they are cleaned.
The excerpt translates to: "The eighth chapter.
The excerpt translates to: "In cutting the excess meat from the thigh.
The excerpt translates to: "Often, excess meat grows on the thigh and is called the first Ablas. It should be tied with a string or held with a clamp and cut at its base, allowing the blood to flow or applying ointment to the affected area.
The excerpt translates to: "Or one of the dried, contracted tendons. If this meat returns after treatment, it often returns twice as much, so cut it again and if it does not return, it will not return later.
The excerpt translates to: "The ninth chapter.
The excerpt translates to: "In extracting teeth with iron.
The excerpt translates to: "Coarse, dry scratches may appear on the surfaces of the teeth, both inside and outside, between the thighs. These can spread and become blackened until they reach the thighs and cause the teeth to become crooked.
The excerpt translates to: "It is recommended that you sit the patient between your hands and their head in a stone and clean the root and the cavity that appears to you with the scratches and the something like mud until nothing remains of it, and do the same with the white and green and sand and the rest until it is clean.
In it, the first part of the girdle is removed, unless it is re-applied later on another day and then again, until you achieve your desired outcome. Be aware that the bandage requires different shaped molds in numerous forms according to what suits your work.
For the bandage that removes the girdle from inside, and not the one that removes it from outside, and the one that removes it between the bands on a different image, there are multiple molds of the bandage that you have all ready.
Chapter Thirty.
Tooth Wrench.
It is recommended that you treat the girdle from its pain with all means and do not touch its wrench, for if you do, it will be useless as it is a sacred core even if it has not been wrenched.
If the patient insists on wrenching it, you should stand firm until the girdle is painless. Many times, the patient deceives the pain and thinks that it is in the right girdle and wrenches it, but the pain does not go away until the sick person's girdle is wrenched, as we have seen this many times with the hakamins.
If you find the pain in its place, it is recommended that you wrap a piece of cloth around your hand with some strength until the pain is relieved from all sides, then move it gently with your fingers or the khalalip, little by little, until it shakes.
When the large dogs have been enabled, the head of the cat is placed between their hind legs and fixed there so that it does not move. Then, the drill is attracted to its uprightness lest it break it. If it does not come out, take one of those instruments and insert it under him from all sides with a rotating motion as you did before.
If the drill is bent or hollow, it is best to fill that socket with a crack and strengthen it with a narrow-angled wedge so that it does not break in your hand while you tighten it with the claw and it is recommended to inspect all sides of the hole.
And preserve your effort so that it does not break it, some of it will remain on the cat from which it came out with a greater pain than the first one, and you should make what they made of the hinges in their doors and their levers without using what we described.
Many people often happen to people with a great pain that the drill breaks and only part of its root remains or some of it. Or, it may break some of the bones of the jaw as we have seen it many times, then it swells after breaking with water or saliva and salt, and many times it happens that something is cut from the jaw and it is inserted into the place.
Otherwise, if the gouge does not benefit you, the picture of the large Khalalibe, the thin-bladed one that moves the drill, should be long-legged with a sharp point, otherwise it will break at your grip on the drill. This is the picture of the large Khalalis.
It should be sharp-pointed even if you grip it, it will not break itself and will not bend the narrow sides, and on its side there should be some holes that enter some into each other so that you can grip it firmly and narrowly.
And the sides can be made in the shape of a bend so that they are also strong to grip.
The ninth and thirtieth section.
In the old well of the screws and the extraction of the broken bones of the femur.
If the handle remains in the old well, it may be placed on the position with a piece of cloth filled with sand for a day or two until the position relaxes, and then the drill or the Khalalibe is inserted into it. Which resembles its sides like the beak of the bird called the brag, and this is the picture of the Khalalibe.
If you have made it like the bend or like the drill, and you do not need to use this Khalalibe, it is better to dig on the old well and remove all the meat with the gouge, and then insert the tool that resembles a small socket that is this picture.
The cut should be shallow and not too wide to avoid splitting; otherwise, use these other instruments, such as the one that contours the side with a part of it being thick.
Another contoured image:
We also use this other instrument with the two shanks depicted:
And other instruments and rods mentioned in the table, as well as this one that resembles the large spatula depicted:
Contours the side slightly to avoid splitting and not be too wide; know that there are many surgical instruments and other tools, and the tool maker may invent tools according to what he observes in his work and diseases themselves.
Because not all diseases are mentioned for their types, if the bone of the jaw or a tooth breaks or becomes discolored, examine it in its place with the appropriate instrument and scalpel mentioned in the list of origins.
We use this image to measure:
Bear in mind that some swelling is necessary to adjust the bone, so it does not slip until the bone comes out. We force the position with the appropriate medication, if the bone is soft and white, remove it from its softness and whiteness until it is clean, then treat it until it is cleared.
The second part of the thirtieth book.
In publishing the inert embryos on others.
If the embryo develops on a different side than its natural axis, it distorts this image, especially if it happens in women and children. It is recommended to look at it, as the embryo may have developed from behind another embryo.
And it has not been able to publish or freeze it, so remove it, and if it is stuck to another embryo, cut it with this tool that resembles its appearance.
And it resembles the small hammer, made of Indian iron, sharp-angled, and its cut should be done in many days for the hardness of the embryo and not to disturb the others, and if it is a mature embryo, freeze it with a freezer from Hindustan, this is its appearance.
It is all from India and its handle is thin, very thin, like the hammer used to make the umbrella, it freezes the embryo slightly, in many days for fear that the embryo will fall, then it will be washed and cleaned and cleared by some means.
When a part of the jaw has cracked, it should be cooled until the damaged part heals and becomes smooth, without causing discomfort during speech and not impairing speech.
The third section of the thirty-third.
In tying the moving teeth with gold threads or silver threads.
If the anterior teeth are wobbly and move due to a blow or fall, and the patient cannot bite on anything to prevent them from falling, they should be treated with antibiotics, but the treatment did not help in this case.
The solution is to tighten the gold or silver thread. The silver is better because it does not corrode and rust after a few days, while gold remains stable and does not corrode. The thread should be of medium thickness and tension, as far as it can stretch between the teeth.
The tying method is to take the thread and insert it between the correct teeth, then twist the ends of the thread between the moving teeth, one at a time, until the twist reaches the correct tooth from the other side.
Then, twist the thread back to the starting point and tighten your grip with wisdom until the tooth does not move. Make sure the thread is tight at the roots of the teeth so it does not slip, then cut the loose ends of the thread with scissors, gather them, and press them between the correct tooth and the moving tooth.
Do not lie with the tongue, then leave it thus as it remains, for it may be cut or severed by another thread in enjoying all these seasons, and this is the appearance of the earrings and the assembly in two correct and moving sections as you see.
And the two sections may fall into their place and intertwine as we described, and this is done by a skilled artisan of sheep bones, and he makes an ear from the bone and places it in the position where the section fell. And it remains and enjoys this as we said.
The fourth book, the thirtieth chapter.
In the cuts of the thread that is under the tongue to prevent speaking.
This thread that is under the tongue may be either natural that is born with the human or it may be artificial from a wound.
And the operation is to open the mouth and head of the animal in your hand, then cut the nerve thread from the side until the tongue comes out of its place, if it has some strength and complexity and it was from a wound, then the snare pierces it from the side and cuts it until the thread is broken and the clasp is released.
When the bone is in the flesh, it cuts the veins here, exposing the blood flow, then it swells after the cut with rose water or alkaline fluid and cold water, then put under the chin a piece of wool soaked in gum and left overnight.
To prevent it from becoming infected, if there is a blood flow, apply an ointment on the place and wrap it with a piece of cloth, then cover the wound with a piece of cloth that fits the place. Then treat it with other remedies until it is completely healed.
The fifth and thirteenth section.
In the extraction of the tumor under the chin.
A tumor may occur under the chin, resembling a small lump that prevents the jaw from performing its natural function and may even grow into the mouth, and the operation is to open the mouth of the alien with the sun in front of it and look at the tumor.
If I see it as a color or black, hard, without the alien feeling it, do not expose it, because it is cancer and if it is slightly yellow in it, there is moisture in it, the gum is in it and cuts it with a fine needle and closes it from all sides.
When the blood is present during your work, apply a poultice of herbs and resin until the blood stops, then return to your work until all is done, then it will be absorbed by the salt and water.
Then treat it with other suitable medications until it is cleared.
The sixth and thirty-second chapter.
In the treatment of a boil.
And what appears in the cavity of other boils may be similar to the glands that are exposed from outside, known as 'lozenges' if they are treated as mentioned in the division, then it did not clear.
If the boil is hard and yellowish in color, like lead, and red and thick, do not expose it to iron fearing bleeding, but leave it until it becomes inflamed so that it may heal or burn from its own nature.
If it is white and soft, this should be cut, and the work should be done before working if the hot boil has become calm or there is a lack of some parts.
Then place the plier in your hand, open its mouth, take a tool between your fingers to dip its tongue from top to bottom of this device.
Make from silver or from thin iron, such as silk, if you tie it around the neck and reveal the tumor to your sight, then take a needle and insert it into the thread and draw it out from outside, except that something from the sutures may come out with it.
Then cut it with this device, its shape resembles a saw but the two sides of each blade are angled, so that one end of one blade fits into the other end of the other blade, as tightly as possible. Make it from Indian steel or Damascus steel:
If you do not prepare this device and cut it with a file as follows:
If you cut one side of the thread sharp and the other side blunt, then after cutting the first thread, cut the second one in this way, and afterwards moisten the needle with cold water or snow and water.
If the wound bleeds, soak it in cold water or snow and water until it stops bleeding, then treat it until it is clean, and other wounds may appear in the string, cut them off as mentioned in cutting the threads.
A woman who had a wound inside her string that caused discomfort, barely felt it, and almost closed the string, she was breathing through a narrow passage, and it prevented her from eating and drinking water.
She had been dead for a day or two, and the tumor had grown to two branches that protruded from her nostril. She started to move with the saw and extracted a piece from one of them.
Then she cut it where she recognized it from the other nostril bone, then did the same with the other nostril bone, then opened her mouth and tied her tongue, then inserted the sawblade into the same tumor, then extracted a piece from it, but only blood flowed from it.
The woman's throat broke, and she started drinking water at her appointed time, then ate food, but we did not cut off any part of that tumor for a long time, and the tumor left behind another in its place that grew until it reached her neck and hers.
The tumor was dislodged from the throat and stopped growing, then it moved away from the side, and I do not know what happened to it after that.
Chapter 72.
In cutting the tumor of the woman.
If the tumor of the woman, which is called a roof when it falls into the throat and twists and is white and narrow, is called a beam, and if it is thick at the bottom and rounded, it is called an onion, then if it heals as we mentioned in the division, the treatment did not work.
I saw the hard tumor that had been healed and it was soft. It is recommended to cut it, as there was no organized structure in it and it did not have length. It was not red or of a certain color or black, nor was there any hue in it. Therefore, it is recommended to avoid cutting it.
In it, there is a flaw on the white part, so if you see it on the side mentioned from its whiteness and length, you should sit with the sun hat and drape your tongue with the instrument that describes it, then the snake will gush in the pot.
It attracts it to the bottom and cuts it with one of the two instruments I mentioned in cutting the lenses, and it is recommended not to cut from it except the one that increases more than the natural one without any additional benefit, because if you cut from it, you will suffer more from sound and speech.
Then, after cutting, you use what I described in cutting the lenses and treat it until it is clean, because the fat of the snake does not fear or hesitate, and the face of the pot is that it is the medicine, which is to put the head of the snake in your stone.
Then, you drape your tongue with the instrument I mentioned, then take from the hot water I mentioned in the pot and rinse it with a non-soaked glass, making it neither thickened nor thin, and fill it with this device and its image:
The excerpt discusses the preparation of a medicinal solution, specifically mentioning the use of a measuring spoon (mlaud) to mix the medicine with water. The device for mixing is placed on the same side as the patient, with one hand supporting it and the other hand holding the container to prevent spillage. The text emphasizes the importance of careful mixing to avoid any harmful substances from entering the wound.
After mixing the medicine with water, the user should hold their hand over the container for about half an hour to allow the medicine to settle and the potion to become clear. If desired, a cloth can be used to wipe the sides of the mortar and pestle with the medicinal solution.
The mortar and pestle is then used to grind the medicinal powder until the desired amount is reached, at which point the user should leave it to dry and become powdery after three or four days. If necessary, the medicine can be re-ground.
After grinding the medicinal powder, it should be washed around the mortar and pestle with a damp cloth to remove any remaining powder. The mixture is then mixed with cold water and treated externally with needles and internally with ginger until it is cleared. This type of treatment is mild and less frightening than other methods.
The physician also treats burns with what is most suitable for the skin and cuts by applying ghiyas, zavafa, sazab, shihab, baboon, qisman, and similar plants of the genus Amyandae. They collect all or some of them in a container and immerse them in the khall.
The cloth is cleaned and the edge of wisdom is made in the middle of the cover, a hook is placed on it with the device twisted on this type, which is made of silver or copper.
The other side is inserted into the mouth of the wound until the water reaches the surgeon through the tube until the surgeon is full, then it is returned to her several times until she becomes full, and you should make this treatment in the first occurrence of the tumor.
And it often increases the tumor, but it is better to do this when the hot tumor is extended, if you do not have this device, take a hook with a hook in one of its eyes and a shell egg in the other so that it does not burn the mouth of the wound.
Because the shell of the egg prevents hot water from burning the mouth and this is good for treatment with safety.
Chapter Eighteen and Thirty.
In the removal of the shock and what happens in the limb from something else.
Many times a bone or a sharp object or something else appears in the limb, it is preferred to remove what was visible before the eye after the tongue has been placed under the instrument at the sun.
To make it clear to you what is in the limb, and what has not been visible in the limb and has retreated into the limb before food enters its cavity, if something else has come out with a sudden movement or if the gut has divided a piece of fat or a small part.
Or if something else has come out with a sudden movement or if the gut has divided a piece of bread or takes a piece of sea turtle and ties it together and then it divides, if it reaches the position of the shock, the cord quickly does that many times.
Many times the shock or bone sticks in it and comes out, if it does not come out with what we mentioned and otherwise use a scalpel on this image:
To be larger than the mucus and on its side to have a division that enters the limb with the gut in unison and raises its head upwards and preserves its stomach so as not to cause vomiting and pushes it with the bone or shock, or the doctor enters his hand.
The patient should be positioned in the best way for the thing to be approached and then pulled down or drawn up with the tool until it feels comfortable for the patient to withdraw.
The ninth chapter, thirty-second verse.
In the extraction of the fixed appendage in the section.
If the tumor was treated as we mentioned in the division of treatment with drugs and it did not respond, then look at the incision of the patient's throat under the sun after she has rinsed her mouth with the tool that was described to you.
If you see the tumor with your eyes, pull it gently with a small needle or with a soft probe if you are able to do so, otherwise insert a bent tube and insert it into the incision of the patient's throat near the tumor, then insert a heated iron protected by fire into the tube.
You should do this several times while the patient endures the pain all day, then he drinks a cold drink with his mouth and opens it in front of him and swallows it without choking and does not leave any residue in his throat and moves the water with his hand.
If the tumor falls on the ground when you feel the water, and if it does not come out as we described, the incision will harden with the bolus and the stool with the tool that was described in the book of God, then you should do this several times because it falls.
The excerpt discusses the process of cauterization in surgery. It involves heating a sponge with fire, covering it with a cloth, and placing it in the middle of a socket. Then, the cauterized tool is placed on this socket, and the patient's mouth is closed to prevent the cauterized substance from entering the pipe. This is done to ensure that the cauterized substance reaches its intended target.
If the cauterized substance falls on the ground, and it does not fall, the cauterized substance will be reapplied multiple times. The patient should endure the thirst and eat salt and onions, and should not drink water. This is because the device attracts the cauterized substance from the socket if it falls on it. This is a picture of the device that attracts the cauterized substance from the socket.
It resembles the clavicle, except for the fact that it has this dislocation that enters the socket and its two ends resemble the beak of a bird in it when it touches something that was not left. This is because the device has a dislocation that enters the socket and its two ends resemble the beak of a bird in it when it touches something that was not left.
Another device is used to tie the throat, which is a wide iron tube that fits over the upper lip and enters the mouth steadily on one side, leaving the mouth open without the patient's will. The patient cannot remove it with the bite until it is removed.
Description of the instrument used to open the mouth on this measurement by itself.
The Fourth Book.
In it, he mentions the speech in the hump and its division.
The humps are many varieties, according to what is mentioned in this book and they differ in shape and division from one another, with one being of a certain type of tumor within itself and the moisture that accompanies it.
And the second type is before the positions in the body because the tumor in the head is not the same as the tumor in the pelvis and the tumor in the flesh is not the same as the tumor in the limb, and each of them has its own operation.
And among the tumors, it is not recommended to open them except after the hardening of the flesh in them and their completion, and some of them are intended to be opened but they have not hardened as close to the joints.
Because if the tumor occurs near a joint and it lasts for a long time, it may cause the ligaments or nerves of that joint to degenerate or the tumor may be close to a major organ.
And if you delay the opening of the wound until the flesh is hardened, it will cause damage to the major organ or if it is close to the pelvis, you must open the tumor non-completely that is close to the pelvis for if it is not opened, the pus will ooze out into the pelvis and become a fistula.
In some cases, it may not be possible to remove the tumor entirely, and it is recommended to learn when the tumor has completely healed, which is when the pain of the tumor subsides, the fever goes away, the loss of redness and swelling disappears, and the enlargement of the tumor head and other signs.
It is recommended to predict the direction of the incision below the tumor position if possible, so that the duration can be shorter or in a more suitable location for the wound. If the tumors are in the form of hands and feet, the incision should be made along the length of the body.
The positions of the muscles, tendons, nerves, and ligaments, as well as all the levels without exception, and those that are excluded should be cut according to their position, and if the tumor is in the meaty areas, it is best to leave the incision.
Until the tumor is completely healed, as we said earlier, if you cut it before that, the wound will take a long time to heal and may cause scarring and disfigurement, and some tumors may need to be cut on the body surface when necessary or according to what the organ needs.
In small tumors, one blade is used, and in large ones, wide or many incisions are made according to the size of the tumor. Some tumors may be so large that they cut the skin if they become like a crack.
In some cases, it resembles what is seen in many dungeons and vaults, and among them is one that has three notches and from which a piece is cut like the shape of a leaf of the Arabic paper as a cork.
From it, the sharp and round notches are used, and if the tumor is large and has gathered for a long time, it is better not to start until the hairs come out all at once in that moment.
Or some of its parts are removed, and then the tumor is grown to another day, and some hairs are also removed gradually until all of them come out.
Especially if the animal is weak or a pregnant woman or a small child or an elderly man, and the animal's spirit often dies with the removal of the hair, so much so that the animal may die before you feel it, be careful with this chapter, it is very important.
After removing these tumors, it is recommended to clean the wound and look, whether the tumor wound is small or if the wound is one simple strip, use the sponge from the cat or the fine linen, and if the tumor is large and the wound strips are many.
It is recommended to enter into each wound strip until some of them meet, and if the tumor has cut through the skin or scratched it, it is recommended to cover it with fine linen or non-wet cloth and let it dry until the third day.
Then, remove it and treat it with what is appropriate from the dressings until it is cleaned, and if there is bleeding during your work, use cold water and vinegar after drinking them, crush a piece of linen and carry it on top of the blood spots several times.
If the bleeding persists, it is recommended to use the dressing and treatment and poultices that we described in many places of this book and the division, and if you are in winter and the tumor site was rich in nerves, it is recommended to apply warm ointment with the drink.
And place it on the site, and if you are in summer and the sites were fatty, it is recommended to carry the poultices with cold water and oil or warm water and oil by itself until the third day as we said, it is recommended to remove the tumor and clean it.
In the treatment, whatever shape it may be, it is necessary to remove it, this is what is required from knowing the treatment of tumors on the sentence and as for the detail, I have mentioned all tumors how to treat it briefly summarized.
The third chapter is the third chapter.
In the operation on the tumors that are exposed on the scalp.
Small tumors are exposed on the scalp, they are types of products that contain them in bags, they have conditions like chicken skin and many other types such as dryness and oily skin.
And from them is that contains moisture like soap and detergent and similar to that, and some are hard and fixed and all have no risk in the operation and removal of it if you did not meet with a vessel during the operation.
The operation in it is to squeeze it first with the instrument whose image appears after this called the sponge until you know what it contains, if it contains moisture then operate on a long stretch of a simple stretch on this image:
Start the operation from the line ~to~ to the line ~from~ if the moisture is released then empty the container that contained that moisture cut it all and do not leave anything behind, often what remains is something.
He then inserted a cloth into the wound of the patient, either in saltwater or plain water, filling it with the wound and leaving it until the next day. It would consume whatever remained of the container. Then, he redressed the wound with cloth dipped in olive oil twice and thrice, as it had become irritated.
Until he is sure that nothing remains of the container, he treats the wound with the dressing until it is removed, and if the tumor contains fatty substances, he cuts them on this image.
He cut the stitching and the eyelets of the wound, turning them from all sides and pulling out the suture that contains it. If you encounter a thread, make what I have described to you afterwards, and also make in the tumor if it is adhesive from fat.
The treatment is done as I have described, and cutting the adhesive tumor is easiest because it has little blood and moisture, and some of these tumors in the head of some people have no moisture with them, that's why I cut on the tumor.
The head of an old woman had a tumor the size of a flint stone, white and soft, that could not be crushed even if it was thrown with a stone, and there were no other tumors in the head except for this one, like the tumors that appear in the heads of children.
At the base of the ear, it is divided into a simple section and made flat to facilitate the passage of the material downwards. Then, it is treated according to the appropriate treatment for it.
The second part of the book.
In the division of the ear, many tumors are found in the ear, and they also occur in other parts of the body. One of them is often found in the ear, and they are often found in clusters. Some of them are born from others.
And each tumor is found in a separate compartment for it, like the goods and skull tumors as we described, and there are many types of these tumors, some of which are adherent and some of which contain moisture and some are not responsive to treatment.
And I saw that the condition of this tumor was good when touched and it appeared to be close in color to the skin, moving to all sides without being connected to a nerve, nor a blood vessel, nor a tendon, nor was it empty. It is recommended to divide it in a simple section from the top to the bottom of the body in this shape from line ~j~ to line ~b~:
And it is recommended to dry it from all sides and spread the skin edges with ointment or ointments or many ointments, as we mentioned in skull tumors and a little comes out little by little and remains on the neck so that it does not cut a vein or a nerve, and the surgeon should not be too careless.
Do not extend your hand beyond the required cut, and do not worry about unneeded cuts. If you cut a vein or a tendon, place some gauze or a few threads in the wound.
Enlarge the wound until the tumor has settled and the wound has healed, as blood will cease to flow at this point. Return to your work and complete it until you are done, then clean the wound with your little finger if any remain small children, cut them off and clean them.
If the vein is large in its origin, it is best not to cut it from its source but to tie it with a thin, fine thread and leave it until it falls off on its own without causing harm. Then clean the wound with Turkish linen that has been soaked in Egyptian mud and treat it.
If you cut the entire vein, it is best to gather the wound's scar and clean it after an hour, as I have learned that there is no benefit in leaving a small piece of the vein. I have seen that there is no benefit in leaving a small piece of the vein.
It is best to cut at the source and remove it, using tweezers as we have mentioned, and there was no vein that contained moisture, so you can dry it out where you see its point of growth, and make the pull as shown below.
After the extraction of the tooth using the Egyptian Nile mud and similar means, consume what remains of the decay until you see the wound healed and treat it with the boiling honey for the meat to dissolve and be removed.
The third section of the thirtieth book.
In the section of the henna about what happens inside the gum.
The first mentioned this section in henna and I had never seen anyone make it in our country, this is the style of their speech, but those who slaughter animals should avoid this section as they do not benefit from it.
To ensure that all the materials and trachea are dry, and those who have hot henna in their mouth or gum or throat if it is not a part of the vagina, then it is necessary to use this section of henna to avoid the discomfort caused by choking.
It is recommended that if we want to do this, we should cut the henna under three circles of the vagina or four small sections in between two circles as much as possible, the section should not be in the thigh but in the buttocks, and this position is suitable for the section.
Because henna has little meat and distant blood vessels, if the surgeon is confident, it is recommended that he stretch the gum skin with a thread and then cut the skin until he sees the blood vessels in the vagina if he sees something from them.
The surgeon then cleaves the incision we described, and indicates the cleave of the bladder tube that emerges with what is cut away and from the silence of sound and leaves the wound open for time. If the time that was feared in the claustrophobia has passed, the wound's skin will heal.
He then drew a line that was not from the gristle, and then used the drugs that make the meat to free it, as this author of the book said that this sentence is only when they see the healer has closed the hole of one of these wounds that we mentioned.
The healer closed the death and said to himself that he would cut the throat to allow the healer to breathe on the wound's side some breath and save from death, but they ordered the wound to be left open until the disease's surah has passed and its cure is three days and about.
Thereupon they ordered the dressing and treatment of the wound until it is cleansed, and I myself saw that a servant took a needle and sent it to the hole of it, cut some of the air's tube with it and called for its treatment and found it bleeding as if it were the dead, and revealed the wound.
I found the blood that escaped from the wound flowing out smoothly, and I saw that it had not cut any veins or arteries, and the wind was coming out of the wound, so I closed it and treated it until it healed, and nothing was exposed to the servant except a slight sound.
It returned after days to its best state, and here we say that the splitting of the hen's neck has no risk in it.
The fourth section of forty.
In the split of the tumor that is exposed on the incision and is called the incision of the incisions.
This tumor called the incision of the incisions is a large tumor on the skin color and is common in women and is of two types.
Either it is natural or it is exposed, and the natural one has no doubt in it, and the exposed one is on two points, one of which resembles the salsilas and the other resembles the tumor that is made from the cord and in its split there is risk. It is not recommended to expose it with iron except what was small of it, if it was pricked and searched with the needle, then it was similar to the salsilas and was not related to anything from the arteries, so it split as the salsilas do. When removing the contents from the container, if it is in a container, then remove all of it. Otherwise, extract everything and then treat the site according to what is appropriate for treatment.
The fifth chapter and fortieth part.
In the section on types of goods in the shop.
The goods are many and I have mentioned all of their types in the division, so it is appropriate to explain the difference between the product and the waste, as it is a cause of fear, so I say that the waste is accompanied by heat, burning, and frightening pain until the glaze cools down. And the frost ends when it settles in the heat and pressure, and the product does not have heat, pressure, or pain with it, and it is contained in a small case with its own color and it begins like the hamsha and turns into the bath and the largest and smallest.
And it is of two types, either a dry one, and it may contain moisture, and the colors of moisture are many as mentioned in the division, so if you decide to treat the goods, it is recommended that you clean it with the tool called the mop on what appears in the next room.
The size of the tumor, then remove the mastectomy and observe what comes out in its aftermath, for moisture will come out of any color that it was divided by a simple cut on all other tumors and if it does not come out in the aftermath of the mastectomy, know that it is gangrene.
Split it with a sharp cut on this picture as I informed you, tie it with the thread and remove the skin from all sides and keep it in the box if you were able to do so that it comes out correctly with the dressing.
If the box is not able to be opened correctly when working, there are many cases where it is extracted in slices until nothing remains of it, for if something remains of it, it may be a knot or the dressing returns more on the case.
If the wound is large and remains in your presence, sharpen the edge of the incision with some sharp needles of severe inflammation, sharpen the wound and treat it with other treatment until it is expelled, if the dressing is large, cut off its bandage and treat it with what heals.
If you refuse feverish or not feverish blood and show bleeding, sharpen the wound with a poultice of turmeric and leave it open for a day or three until the wound heals and stops oozing blood then return to remove what remains of the dressing.
The 10th Century Arabic Textbook on Surgery by Albucasis, Chapter 64.
In the section on instruments.
The instruments used for the abdomen and pelvis include three types of scissors: large, middle, and small.
A large scissor.
A middle scissor.
A small scissor.
These are scalpels, also known as blades. They come in three sizes: large, middle, and small. A large blade.
A middle blade.
A small blade.
These blades are used to inspect the bones, wounds, and necrosis within them, and to make an incision like a saw blade made of porcelain, Chinese glass, or metal, or silver. The best is made of porcelain.
Additionally, blades can be made of mercury and are used to treat the bones that contain them, allowing them to straighten out with the treatment. They also come in three sizes: long, middle, and small.
As much as it needs, the surgeon should stretch the bone and make it fit within the size of the bone and its narrowness. A large mercury blade.
A middle-aged man suffering from a stone in the bladder was brought to me. I performed a cystotomy and removed the stone after a brief operation.
A small stone in the bladder was removed from a young man after a successful surgical procedure.
There are various types of stones, including simple ones with a single focus, and more complex ones classified as large, medium, or small. The most common types are the Albucasis stones, which have multiple focuses. There are three types of stones with multiple foci, including the simple large stone. Here is a picture of a simple large stone removed from a patient. A middle-aged man suffering from a simple large stone in the bladder was brought to me. I performed a cystotomy and removed the stone after a brief operation. A small simple stone in the bladder was removed from a young man after a successful surgical procedure.
A large Albucasis stone in the bladder was removed from an elderly man after a successful surgical procedure. A middle-aged man suffering from a large Albucasis stone in the bladder was brought to me. I performed a cystotomy and removed the stone after a brief operation.
A small Albucasis stone in the bladder was removed from a young man after a successful surgical procedure.
A large stone with multiple foci in the bladder was removed from an elderly man after a successful surgical procedure. A middle-aged man suffering from a stone with multiple foci in the bladder was brought to me. I performed a cystotomy and removed the stone after a brief operation. A small snare with nooses: This is a small snare device with multiple nooses, used for various surgical procedures.
A large snare with three nooses: This is a larger snare device with three nooses, used for more complex surgical procedures.
A middle-sized snare with three nooses: This is a snare device of moderate size, also featuring three nooses, used for a variety of surgical procedures. A small snare with three nooses: This is a smaller snare device with three nooses, used for delicate surgical procedures.
This is an image of a large snare, used to remove goods and impurities. It comes in three sizes: large, medium, and small.
This is an image of a middle-sized snare: A snare device of moderate size, used for various surgical procedures.
This is an image of a small snare: A snare device with multiple nooses, used for delicate surgical procedures.
The snare's openings should be limited, while the sides are not. This allows for better removal of impurities when cutting bones or nerves, and provides some relief from the pain caused by the burning sensation felt during excision.
This is an image of a large hook, used to remove goods and impurities. It comes in three sizes: large, medium, and small.
Make from a small piece of marble that resembles the head of a bird, with a narrow opening on one side, resembling a mouth, and a hidden beak inside, through which air enters and leaves. Do this as you see fit.
Images of the thumb-wrestling bird's beak that is not felt by the patient during dental work, which has three types: large, middle, and small, a large bird's beak image.
Images of the blood vessel ligatures, which are cut by blood flow and have three types: large, middle, and small, a large blood vessel ligature image.
Make from marble or polished stone, as you see, and it should be long but not too long. It is recommended that the types of ligatures in your possession be large and small to cut blood quickly when necessary and when there is no medicine available.
However, do not use for cutting blood in all parts of the body, but only in the meaty areas such as the thigh, heel, shoulder, liver, and stomach, and other soft organs.
These can be used to make smaller instruments resembling the ribs of the intestines, as shown in this image.
It obstructs the flow of blood when it bleeds from the site of the artery or when cutting through a vein or cord, and this can be made into a tool on this image.
Chapter 74.
In treating male impotence.
Some men's penises may become swollen and hard like a woman's during orgasm, remaining erect and sometimes even becoming painful or wet, so if one does not like this, it is recommended to cut the penis in this manner.
From ~b~ to ~j~. Then remove all the sweat, then fill the wound with salty medicine, then gather the edges of the wound with sutures and treat it until it is clean, as the penis from top to bottom lies flat due to its strength, just like it appears to women.
It is recommended to cut along the upper edges with two cuts that resemble a crescent moon, connecting each of them at the end until the largest one surrounds the smallest on this image. From the skin between the cuts, remove the sweat, use the materials mentioned earlier and any necessary treatment to clean it until it is clean.
If you do not absorb cuts that are appropriate for anxiety or from bleeding of blood, it is recommended to cover the wound with a clean cloth dipped in vinegar and leave it until the remaining meat has consumed the vinegar, then treat it until it drains.
The eighth chapter and the fortieth.
In the wounds that are exposed under the ribs.
These wounds that are exposed under the ribs are of the firm kind, enclosed in a bag, and what is inside it is moist, so whatever is inside it is moist. It is recommended to make a crescent-shaped incision on this form.
From the line ~~ to the line ~~ if you remove all that is inside the wound during its duration, cover it with a clean cloth and leave it until the next day, then remove the cloth.
And treat it with the appropriate vinegar until it drains. If the wound is of the kind of a ribbed cartilage, make an incision on it as we mentioned in the incision on the ribs, whether the wound extends to the point of dividing the cartilage, then use the knife on what we mentioned in what follows.
The ninth chapter and the fortieth.
In the region of the tumor that is exposed by the thread or cord, and is called aneurysm.
If the artery is incised and the overlying skin is removed, much of the tumor and also the vessel are exposed to air, which can cause it to expand and swell.
The signs that indicate whether the tumor and swelling are before the artery or vein, if the tumor is before the artery it will be a horizontal band in the depth of the body and if you push the tumor with your finger you will feel it as if it has a border.
If the tumor is before the vein, it will be raised in appearance of the body, and the cut on these tumors is dangerous, especially in the ribs, shoulders, neck, and many other parts of the body, it was very large, so it is better to avoid treating them with iron.
And what was on the sides or the head, it is better to avoid, because what was on the tumor in the artery was cut in the skin, a long cut was made in the flesh, then the cut was opened with needles, and the artery was emptied from the sutures.
Until it bursts, then enter the forceps and withdraw it to the other side and tie the artery with a thin thread in two places where you marked on the sutures of the arteries in the finger, then cut between the tendons until the blood that was in it all comes out.
The tumor is then allowed to heal until the tendons fall off, and it is treated with appropriate bandages until it is cured.
If the tumor is before the vein, it is best to hold your hand with as much of the tumor as possible with your skin, then insert a hook from the position you held with your hand and pull out the thin thread until it comes out from the other side. Then tie the tumor with a good knot as mentioned in tying the gauze from both sides with the corners of the thread, because you are afraid that the threads will slip, so insert another hook with another thread under the whole tumor at the intersection of the first hook.
And tie your threads in four places, then cut the tumor in the middle until nothing is left, and cut off the excess skin, leaving what is left attached, then put a poultice on it that has been soaked in wine and oil. Then use the treatment that consists of the plaster and bandages until it is cured.
The fifth book.
In the tumor that is exposed from the nerve.
Similarly, the tumor is exposed in the tendon and vein as well, if it occurs in the nerve, or there is an excessive shock, or pain, or similar to this, it is more common in the tense and bent parts.
In every position, the muscles move and it resembles the color of the rest of the body. It is in most cases not painful, and if pressed with great force, the patient feels severe pain, almost like dying. The tumor is not found throughout the depth of the body.
Indeed, it is under the skin and moves to all sides, not advancing towards the front or back, so whatever it was in the muscles, it should not be exposed to iron because it might have been a recent time, and what it was in the head or on the jaw.
If the skin is split with a knife, and the tumor is small, it should be grasped with forceps and cut out from the beginning, and if it is large, it should be tied with a suture and cut off, then stitch up the wound with wire and treat it until it is cleaned.
The ninth and twentieth chapter.
In cutting the thoracic incisions that are exposed in the abdomen.
Many people may have incisions in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies, called hernias, which resemble the navel but are softer in the original and broader at the top, and their wounds have changed and there are small ones and large ones.
A man came in with two tumors in his belly, resembling figs, of a pale white color, which turned the scars and caused wetness to constantly drip from them. I cut them off and weighed one at about eighteen ounces and the other at six ounces.
The operation in cutting them is to look at whether the tumor is wet and the color of the tumor is white with a thin wetness, and it is cut with a wide blade in your hand in the fire, and it often pours out a lot of blood when cutting them.
You should know that your blood will make them bleed, and I saw the tumor trembling and shaking from being cut with steel, so take a piece of lead powder and apply it to this tumor that is in this form and leave it for two days, then increase the heat of the lead until it still bleeds.
Each time you affect the tumor until it cuts off and falls from its own without any pain, if the tumor is original, then in cutting it some fear and anxiety, especially in the belly, but it may be possible that half of it or part of it can be cut.
When the wound is closed and the bleeding stops, avoid cutting the flesh that resembles the color of a pale yellowish-brown glass, as it may be a cancerous tissue and will be mentioned later.
The second chapter, fifth section.
In the treatment of rectal prolapse.
Rectal prolapse can be caused by various factors, such as a hernia in the abdominal wall that causes the intestine to protrude, or hemorrhoids that are exposed in other areas, or blood oozing from the anus or a vessel ahead, or wind that constricts it.
If it occurred before the hernia and the intestine protrusion, the tumor's color resembles that of the body and is not painful, and it appears in different stages. If it occurred before the hemorrhage, its condition would be more different from what we have described, and if you clutch it with your fingers, it may disappear and then return, possibly with a lot of pain when entering the bath and extreme fatigue, and if it occurred before moisture, it is not painful.
It will not disappear if you clutch it with your hand, and it will not increase or decrease, and if it occurred before blood, the tumor will appear yellowish and firm, and if it occurred before fatty tissue, the tumor will be rigid and fixed on one point.
In the event that the wound was preceded by wind, and the operation involves observing whether the intestine or the artery or the wind is before the anus, it is advisable to abandon treatment as there is fear and hesitation just as you were informed about the abscesses mentioned in the chapter regarding the wounds caused by the intestine and the artery.
If the wound was preceded by excrement or dung, it is advisable to order the attendant to hold himself and stand firmly stretched out, then learn about the anus with the cataplasm all over it. Then order him to lie on his back on your lap, then wash the anus with a wide flat piece of cloth in the position you taught with the cataplasm, then open the wound wide with a large scalpel, then tie the position of the washing with a strong cord or woolen ribbon tightly.
The knot of the rib should be tight, then open the center of the swollen wound over the rib and insert your little finger into it and ask for excrement if you found it in the rib, then loosen the knot and pull out the excrement and push the rib inside the abdomen, and if you found dung, then tie it with a large scalpel.
If the cord or gauze is obstructed, you should open it, return to your work, and insert two strong threads into the braces that encircle the tumor. Then, turn the tumor in four directions on the braces.
If you wish to remove the braces and leave the position until the fatty tissue recovers on its own or falls off, or cut it if it becomes loose and swollen, then treat it with what is appropriate from the dressings until it comes out, because if the end of the sleeve is in fatty tissue.
Or if the tumor should swell as we said and blood or moisture should be found in it, then treat it with what is appropriate for the position.
The third and fiftieth section.
In the treatment of cancer.
We mentioned in the classification the types of cancer and how to treat them with drugs, and we warned against treating them with iron because it may grow, and we mentioned the cancer that develops in the womb and warned against treating it.
We mentioned earlier that when the cancer was in a position that could be removed as a whole, like the cancer in the ovary or thigh and similar organs, it should be extracted with its entirety, especially if it was small and new, but when it grew large, it should not be approached.
I have not been able to describe it to anyone else, and I have not seen it before. The work in it is as we said, when it is capable, it facilitates the removal of the black day many times, then it separates it if it is in the valves, full of clear.
Then the graft is placed in a part that can be worked on, then it receives the sawn pieces from the sarcoma that suits them, and it is carved from all sides with the skin until nothing remains of its original form and leaves the blood to flow and does not cut it quickly.
But the most critical areas are where thick blood is all poured out in your hand or with what tools you have available, because if you stop working on the operation, a large amount of blood will bleed from the cut threads or purple skin until the blood stops and then it is treated with other treatments until it is cleaned.
Chapter Fourteen and Five.
In the treatment of hemorrhoids.
We have been told in the classification of types of irrigation and how the flow of water is assembled, and the signs of each type and the treatment of each type with drugs, and that only the zaqzai' type is treated by iron, and it does not approach the thick type or the type of beef and fat.
If this is battle, and you have treated this kind of inflammation with medications and it has not improved, then consider if the patient's condition has significantly weakened or if there is another underlying disease besides inflammation present.
Vomiting or diarrhea and similar symptoms indicate that you should treat it with iron, as it is exhausted. If I see the physician's opinion, he has gained strength beyond inflammation alone and was not a child nor a young man, so the purpose of the physician in this matter is to stand firm and remain between your hands. And the servant behind him cuts his stomach with his hands and pushes the water towards the side of the pain, then takes a violent shake on this appearance.
The limit of both sides is long and defined like the shake, but there is some juice in it so that it does not allow for it during the work until the stomach, then look if the inflammation is produced from the side of the intestines.
It is recommended that you remove the appendix from the inside of the thigh three fingers below the heel, if the inflammation is produced before the liver disease, then your appendix should be removed from the inside of the thigh with three fingers, if it is produced before the gallbladder disease, then the appendix should be removed on the left side with three fingers.
Do not allow the incision to be on the side that the patient wants the swelling to be, otherwise curiosity may lead to that weak point, then tighten all the instruments, then insert the instrument into that cut and lift your hand.
Between the skin and the blade, pretend to scrape it until the depth of the scratch is equal to the thickness of the blade or close to it, then tighten the blade until it reaches an empty position, which is the position of the water, then remove it and insert the device into the tightened blade.
It is like a narrow tube made of thin silver, or of copper, or of brass, with a small protrusion at the bottom and three protrusions on each side, as you see.
And it may place a corner on the side of the pen holder on this shape.
In the upper corner, if the device reaches the water, it will come out of the clock on the device, so it will drain from the water at a moderate time because if you drain from it more than it should, the animal's spirit will die.
When the patient is in a critical state, but recovers based on the strength of their heart and the condition of their pulse, and their skin color, then the instrument is removed and the water is stopped, as it absorbs from the time of its start.
Due to the skin that clings to the nail on the handle that informed me to pierce it on that spot, then the instrument is returned the following day if I see the patient possible for that.
And the water that is left over is done a few days while you are on your knees and you correct from mistakes so that only the little water remains, if you missed the patient and left something from the water, then it is treated with burying in hot sand.
And the excessive bathing and sun exposure and enduring the drought and treating it with drying drugs until it is clean, and it settles on the stomach, liver, and gallbladder after removing the water as described in what follows.
The fifth chapter and the fifty-fourth section.
In the treatment of children who are born and the positions of their bolus from them that are not curved or the nail is narrow or in a different position.
Some boys may exit from their mother's stomach with an unformed leg, it is recommended to insert a splint in his leg as soon as he is born.
On this image, there are four small dots.
Then, insert a thin mercury barrel into the splint, tie it, and keep it for three or four days. When you want to remove it, and if you don't use mercury, it may not close the wound.
And for the one whose splint is narrow, it is treated with mercury as we said for many days until it expands, and those who have a splint in a non-correct position, that is because some of them can't pass the wound at the end of the pregnancy.
Until the splint is raised with his hand above, and he doesn't give birth before that, because the womb can't reach the head on its own due to its shape, which is very bad, and the work in this is to make the patient lie on his chest.
Then, stretch his leg with your left hand firmly and tie the head of the splint with a rope or a thick string, or like you are holding something to be in the middle like a leg, and insert the splint in the middle according to what is appropriate.
Preserve blood loss during your work as much as possible, for it may be treated by cutting the blood vessel and treating the wound until it is cleared.
The Sixth Chapter: The Treatment of Wounds.
In the dressing that covers the flap, the gauze, and the adhesive tape.
This dressing is often used in the dissection and is made of a mixture of hot and cold fat, so the cold fat should be wrapped with a soft thread.
Cut it until it is clean, then wrap it with a white cloth in the Egyptian style, and treat it afterwards with the Egyptian cotton until it is cleared. If the dressing is dark in color, it is recommended to use the black thread after cutting and removing it.
If the dressing is in a wrapping that has not been burned and some of the dressing is inside and some outside, it is recommended to remove the dressing inside first, even if it has soaked, and treat it from the outside.
Because you may not secure the wrapping if you treat them together, and it may also appear in women and in the gauze, it is recommended to cover everything that has been soaked and see if it has spoiled or has spoiled.
Then, apply honey on it, followed by rose water with finely ground, nourishing rhaman and muslin cloth. Then, treat it with other remedies until it heals. If there is signs of blood oozing out, use a piece of papyrus sheet on this image:
For both conditions, honey is beneficial, especially when there is bleeding or wounds that have closed. If the urine has turned dark and the urethra has become narrow, it is recommended to insert a mercury tube into the urethra to open it up.
However, this contraction only occurs in those whose lining is intact and has not been cut. It may be exposed to wounds or burns, so it is recommended to cleanse it with a weak vinegar until the membrane becomes smooth from all sides.
However, it is difficult to distinguish between the two, so it is recommended to cleanse a part of the membrane and the lining. This is because the lining is soft, so it quickly conforms to its shape. Then, separate the lining from the membrane with a thin, cold water-soaked cloth to prevent them from sticking together.
The physician then treats the wound with blood until it stops bleeding.
The seventh chapter and fifteenth section.
In the cleaning of children and the treatment of errors they may incur.
Circumcision is not something other than separation of connections, except that it was one of our practices with our own will and use, especially in children, and therefore we must draw the best result from it.
The easiest way to ensure safety, I say that the early physicians did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not used in their laws and it was what we acquired.
By experience, I found that the majority of craftsmen and barbers use cleaning with mustard and with twine and use the flaying and the stitch with silk and cutting with iron and all these faces have been tried.
I did not find anything better than the cleaning with twine and the stitch with silk because the cleaning with mustard often damages the skin because the upper layer of the cloth is cut and the lower layer remains.
He is forced to cut another and it causes pain and the cleaning with flaying does not guarantee the cut because it may enter into its hole, and as for the cleaning with iron, it may cause the skin to fall off or the child's skin may be short.
Many are born without needing cleansing, and I have seen this, and the cleansing with a scalpel and a suture needle is preferable because the scalpel blades are suitable for cutting the wound from above like the one from below.
When you sharpened your hand on the two wounds with a single measure and in one time, the handle of the needle seemed like a wall for the skin of the specimen from all sides without any mistakes in the piercing, and the first thing to do is to deceive the child.
Indeed, if someone understands little that you only tie the needle in the specimen and make him come to another day then delight him with both hands that you can do this with him and what he accepts with his mind, then stop him between your hands holding the crown.
Do not let him sit and do not sharpen the scalpel in his mouth or under your foot for the eye of the child will not be on the piercing and not on anything of the instruments, then put your hand into the specimen and blow on the skin and smooth it up until the head of the specimen comes out.
Then clean what gathered in the incision, then tie the position of the cut with a fine thread, then tie a little below it a second suture, then hold your arm with your hand and the side of the suture, make sure the suture is well placed and cut between the sutures. 1. Lift the skin quickly and remove the head of the amputation, then let the blood flow slightly as it's best and least damaging to the amputation. 2. Wetly break it with a soft cloth, then apply fresh red blood from the old, burnt carotid artery. It's the best that has been tried or the sharp dissection, it's also preferable.
1. Lift the skin quickly and remove the head of the amputation, then let the blood flow slightly as it's best and least damaging to the amputation. 2. Wetly break it with a soft cloth, then apply fresh red blood from the old, burnt carotid artery. It's the best that has been tried or the sharp dissection, it's also preferable. 3. Then carry the eggs on top of the legs in a crack, cooked egg in rose water mixed with good garden rose oil, and leave it until another day, then treat it with other treatments until it comes out.
4. And this is the image of the turpentine that is suitable for cleaning:
5. The turpentine should be a sharp one without roughness in it, with the length of the stems equal to the length of the handles, and as for the mistakes in cleaning, it's better if you soak the inner skin completely or partly when cutting before the position takes shape.
6. Cut it on the flat, and if you can't hold it with your hand, use a pair of scissors to cut it, and let it remain for three days and leave what's under the head of the amputation exposed and dried until the wound heals and closes it with a needle.
Remove the head of the tumor, for cutting something from the head of the tumor does not harm it, and treat it with what is applied to wounds from the warts that we described in the chapter on warts.
If the skin is cut above the size and has shrunk upwards, it does not harm much either, so treat it with what we mentioned until it is cleared.
The eighth and twentieth chapter.
In the treatment of urine that is retained in the womb.
Retained urine in the womb is caused by blocking of a part or blood, or fat, or dry meat and similar, and if this is treated with what we mentioned in the doses described in the division, it will be cured.
And I did not see that the retention of urine was before a blockage in the womb, so it is better to make the patient lie on his side and put his leg on his chest and stretch his abdomen towards his chest and hold the congestion firmly as he can.
Then the womb must be forced to push the blockage to the back, and if the urine does not flow out, it is better to use the device called the forceps which looks like this:
Make of silver and be fine, smooth like a feather of bird's tail in a long ribbon, half of it has a gentle bend at its head, and the face attracts the bolus with it, taking a thick thread and tying it at one end to a silver or cloth tie well.
And enter the other end of the thread into the sockets and draw it out with a puller, something from the silver for it to enter into the pipe and block it like a bolt, then polish the sockets with oil or ghee or egg white and place the patient on a chair.
And pull out the plug and wash it with wet sand or oil and water, then insert the sockets into the washing until they reach the bottom of the washing, then twist the washing up towards the belly and push the sockets inside.
Until the washing is twisted and pushed inside until it gets close to the chair and the sockets are inside, then push them until they reach the plug and the patient feels that he has reached something empty.
And it is made on this level because the pipe through which the bolus passes in it swells, then stretch the thread with silver lightly as the bolus follows the silver, then pull it out and the bolus will be blocked, and the sockets are repeated.
She continues to do that until the belly is empty and the physician finds nothing.
The ninth chapter, fiftieth verse.
How to inject the belly with a lancet.
And there are images of the devices that are made from silver or from glass that has a long tube on it, and you intended to cut in it the water and the drugs, and that will be with a device called the lancet, here is its image:".
It is made from silver or from glass that has a long tube on it, on the melted glass, except for the three prongs, two from one side and one from the other, as you see.
The sharp point on which the needle is placed, as much as it can be inserted without anything else, until if it attracts something from the moisture, it attracts it and if it pushes it, it pushes it to the side of what the lubricant makes when they pour oil in the wars of the sea.
If you intended to raise the moisture in the belly, you inserted the sharp point of the lancet into the moisture and attracted it with the needle upwards, then the moisture is drawn into the belly according to what we described in the cauteries, then the moisture is pushed out with the needle.
This moisture reaches the navel until it is felt by the patient, and this is a picture of a gentle incision that also includes the navel.
Make a head from gold or silver, with a small crown-like top, and a groove below it where the graft will be placed. Then, take the incision and place the moisture you want to inject into it, then tie it between the two halves with a wide knot using a silk thread.
Cool the moisture slightly on the fire, then insert one hand into the incision, and gently press the graft with the moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the graft.
If you do not have a graft, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it, sew all around it, then insert a thin thread into the hole as it turns, and then gather the circle like the sari after placing the moisture and other substances you want in it.
Then, tie it in the device and make it like the graft from your hand until the moisture reaches the graft.
The seventh chapter.
In the removal of the wedge.
In the division of the wedge, we mentioned the types of wedges and their treatment with drugs, and noted the difference between wedges born in the kidney and those born in the uterus, and their signs, all of which, and the wedges where the work is done by hand and foot.
And this is the wedge born in the uterus, particularly, and that burns in the dissection, and I describe it as a concise explanation.
I say that the wedge born in the uterus is more prone to be affected by children, and among its signs is that the urine comes out of the uterus similar to water in its color.
And the feces are present, and it is mentioned that he mentions it and plays with it, and it often spreads, and the seat is prominent in many of them, and it is easy for children to get it until they reach fourteen years, and it is difficult in old age, and as for the young men, it is between the two.
And the larger the wedges are, the easier the treatment is, and the smaller ones, against that, if we go to the treatment, it is better first to inject the seal with an injection that evacuates all the pus that is in his abscess, for he may prevent the appearance of the wedge during the inspection.
The surgeon then grasps the patient's legs with both hands and shakes them downwards to allow the incision to reach the anus or multiple times from a high position, then places one of his hands between your hands, with the other hand under his own wrist to make the entire anus lean towards the bottom, then spreads it.
And if you feel the incision outside, it means that the cut has been made in the space, so start to scratch it with your hand if it hasn't fallen under your finger tip, then it is recommended to scrape the little finger of the right hand with oil from the left hand if the surgeon is a child or the middle finger.
If the child is completely naked, enter the incision into his seat and spread it over the cut as much as possible until it falls under your finger tip, then gently hold it with your finger and pull it towards the anus area, then push it out towards the place you want to cut.
And order the servant to cut the anus with his hand and order another servant to spread his left female hand above and his right hand under the skin of the area where the cut will be, then take the scraper like this:
And cut between the seat and the women not in the middle but on the right side of the left leg, the cut should be on the same incision and your finger in the seat and you press it out wide but narrow inside as much as possible to make the incision wide and narrow from outside to inside according to how much the incision can exit from it.
The woman who suffered the most pressure from the compressed toe in the bench, she removed it without difficulty, and knew that the bench may have grooves and letters that make it difficult to remove her toe.
And from her, the one resembling the bolter and polished, it is easy to remove her toe, because there are no grooves or letters on her, if she did not remove it, it would be better to cut off her toe with a sharp blade that has a straight edge like a razor.
To adjust on the bench, do not lose sight of it, and if you cannot reach under it, stretch out the bench slightly, and if your arm is weak, something from your blood will flow out, then cut it with a sharp knife.
If there is more than one, first push the larger one towards the mouth of the dungeon, then put a bench on it, and then push the small one after that, and if there are more than two, then do the same, if the large one is very big, it is not known to cut it with a large bench because it exposes one of two things.
Either he dies or he suffers from perineal abscess every time to prevent the wound from getting worse, but try to push it until it comes out or cuts it with a curette until it comes out in pieces.
When you have finished your task, clean the wound with a cloth and apply ointment or drink a mixture of rose water and cold water to soothe the burning wound. Then, place the bandage on the affected area and do not delay the application of the gauze until the third day.
If you wash the affected area with water and oil, then treat it with marsh mallow and bay leaf oils until it opens, the appearance of the wound and burning excess will be like cold blood in the vein, stopping urine, and knowing this from the exit of blood with urine.
Insert your finger into the wound and remove the blood if it remains, as it may cause inflammation of the vein and damage it. Then, clean the wound with salt water and soap and treat each type according to its shape until it opens.
It is recommended during all stages of treatment to tie the hands and gather them to confirm the drugs placed on the wound, if the incision is small and became in the neck and stopped the exit of urine, treat it with what I have described before it becomes rigid.
Many times, this treatment has been able to avoid rigidity, I have tried it and this is the image of the medicine:
The excerpt translates to: "Divide the angle sharply, then take a thread and tie it to the stump so that it does not return to the wound, then insert a caustic wire into the dissection along with it until the caustic wire reaches the same incision.
The excerpt translates to: "Place the caustic wire in your hand within the same incision a little, and turn its point until it penetrates from the other side because the pus will flow from its tail then close your hand on what remains of the incision outside the stump as it tears and exits with the pus and relieves the wound.
The excerpt translates to: "If this treatment does not please you for the stricture, take a thread under the incision and another one above it, then cut through the incision on the same stump between the ties, then pull it out.
The excerpt translates to: "Then close the suture and let the cold blood that accumulated in the wound out, but it is necessary to tie the thread under the incision so that it does not return to the wound and the other tie from above so that if the thread comes out after the incision closes, the skin will cover the wound again.
The excerpt translates to: "Therefore, it is advisable for you if you raise the skin above when you tie the upper tie so that it returns to its place when you are free and covers the wound as we have said.
The 10th Century Arabic Textbook on Surgery by Albucasis, Chapter 22.
In the removal of the uterus in women.
The hysterectomy in women is rare, and if one of them presents with a hysterectomy, it is difficult to treat her and many people refuse because the woman may be too old and the second reason is that you will not find a woman willing to surrender herself to the doctor.
If it is a hysterectomy or from women with prolapses and the fourth, you will not find a woman to improve this operation, especially manual work, and the fifth, the position of the incision on the uterus in women is far from the position of the incision on the uterus, so it needs a wide scar.
And the risk, if the need for it is urgent, it is better that a woman be a good doctor and very few, if she does not have one, ask for an old, friendly male or prepare a good woman in the matter of women or a woman who refers to this operation some indication.
Prepare her and order her to make everything you ask her to do on the uterus first, because if the woman is old, it is better that she enters her finger into the seat of the uterus and examines the uterus if she found it and press it with her finger.
When commanded to be cut, she should insert her little finger into the vulva of the patient and spread it widely after placing her right hand on the mound and pressing it firmly.
If she is found to be pregnant, it is recommended that she be lifted from the mouth of the vagina downwards as far as the root of her foot, then she should be rubbed on the side of the vulva opposite the root of the foot, wherever she feels the womb in that direction.
Her finger should not be withdrawn from the womb until it is completely relaxed, then the midwife should insert her hand into that small opening if she feels the womb contracting, and increase the opening according to what she knows about the type of womb.
These are small and large, rough and smooth, long and short, and curved, so know their types to be able to determine this by them, for if your blood clots in the dry place it should be held there until it stops bleeding, then return to your work.
Until the womb is delivered, and work with the instruments mentioned for delivering a woman's womb in men to help you in your work, for if your blood clots it means that the pulse of the blood vessels is stopped due to cutting the ovaries on that spot.
If the wound becomes inflamed, then treat it. After a few days, if the bleeding ceases and the area heals, return to your work until the cutlet is extracted.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
On the incision of the sea water vagina.
The sea water vagina is a moisture gathering in the white layer under the peritoneum surrounding the egg, known as the Greek and is sometimes enclosed in a special covering to maintain its natural state on one side of the egg.
Until it is thought to be another egg and lies between the peritoneum and the white layer we mentioned, and this is only in the vulva, and this vagina is produced from weakness in women, they insert this material into it and may be subjected to a blow on the women.
This moisture has various colors, either it is white or red like blood, black like charcoal, or blue like water, and these are the most common, and the signs that are known for them.
When water is present, if it is in the white pouch that we mentioned earlier, the tumor is well-defined for a short distance, resembling an egg shape, and does not exhibit any characteristics because moisture surrounds it from all sides.
And if moisture is in the white pouch of the owl, then the tumor is well-defined at one end, resembling an egg shape.
And so the human thinks that it is another egg, and if moisture is between the hide of the owl and the white pouch, it is below the senses, and if you want to know the color of the moisture, cut the tumor with a square saw blade and see what comes out, and based on what is inside, judge it.
If we proceed with silver treatment, it is best to order the patient to lie down if possible and see that his body is filled, then he lies on his back on something low, such as a pillow, and places under him many cracks, and you sit on his right side.
And order the attendant to sit on his left side and stretch his finger towards one side of the hide of the owl and towards the abdomen's side, then take a wide scraper and shave the hide of the owl from the middle to near the injury.
The limb is placed on a line parallel to the incision that divides the skin of the knee into halves until it reaches the white abdominal bag, then it is sealed and preserved from damaging it and becoming its seal from the side that connects to the egg, and the seal is expanded as much as possible.
Then the bag is filled with warm water and all the water is expelled, then it is divided between the wounds of the cut by zones and the bag is raised to the top and does not touch the skin bag, and the bag is cut as much as possible either by one cut or by several cuts.
Indeed, the soft side is because if you do not cut the cuts, the water will not return, for when the egg comes out of its shell while you are working, if you stop cutting the bag, take it apart and then gather the edges of the skin of the knee with the thread.
Then it is treated with the treatment of other surgeries until it is discharged, for if the egg was damaged from another disease, it is better to tie the vessels in the bag fearing bleeding and then cut off the knee from the bag and take out the egg and treat it as we have mentioned.
In the event that water is present in both sides, it is known that it has two effects on the opposite side, whether or not it stands still, perform the action and then cleanse the blood.
It enters the cavities where soap has been immersed in oil or olive oil, and another part of it has been immersed in alcohol and water, spreading it over both sides, lifting the abdomen, and placing a flat, hollow opening above it, which is the rings. And she ties it above with the tie that has six sides on this picture:
Then, she takes two openings and they are intertwined with the rough soap on this example and make the sides that it has from cloth or damp soap, gather together at the back of the belt and one side is taken to the seat back.
And the second is taken towards the waste and the two sides are on the shoulders, and they gather together all of them in the belt, and this band can also be made instead of the ring with iron.
And it is that a soft mat takes the skin and presses it with it, as we have described until the white container of water bursts, take another mat on this picture.
This resembles the Greek eye, then it covers it with this cloth until all the moisture comes out, then it spreads this cloth with the wool and dips it in the layered clay and cuts it according to what you can until all of it is removed and preserved from the egg not to burn it.
And know that this operation is preferred and better than bleeding blood, for if you encounter a bleed from the vein or during labor, or hot wind or blood or something else, it is recommended to treat all of it with the treatment that suits each of them according to what has been given.
If the patient is weak and could not endure this operation for the purpose of this, then let him use the calf on what I have described it as being safe according to what we have presented with the evidence.
And know that the cure is watery, so it is recommended to make the patient sit on a high stool then cut the tumor at its bottom with a wide blade and let the calf be on the body's length and make the opening wide until all the water comes out then put a cloth on it and tie it.
And let it drip the rest of the water then treat it until the wound is clean, for if the water flows out in the mouth when you blow on it, it is because the white covering blocks the mouth of the wound preventing the water from flowing out.
Indeed, it is recommended that you enter into the wound a sponge or the instrument from which water is extracted, or slightly enlarge the opening of the wound.
And know that water may return and gather after six months or so, and if it gathers, it is best to apply the same dressing and allow the poultice to dry for a few days.
The third part and sixth section.
In the section on treating the fatty cheek.
Know that the treatment of this cheek is from the cause that leads to death in more cases, so we see it left and its safety from it, and I remember the work in it and types of tumors.
I say that many tumors have occurred in the bodies whose composition is female and it is due to either a free nucleus that is deposited in the females or from a blow, and the color of the tumor is the same as the color of the body and there is no water.
The tumor is soft and maybe the tumor was a solid color like pork and without sense, and it may have been due to the tightening of the vessels and their contraction as mentioned or from the contraction of the tendons, so what is known about the tightening of the vessels is called the spread of the tumor.
When you pinch with your fingers and it is not recommended to expose the nail, and as for that which is from the swelling of the tendons, there is nothing on it when pinched with fingers, and this kind may cause it and other limbs.
And it is that the skin of the knee is peeled off, then the egg is raised to above and it is expelled from the white bag, and the tie is relieved of the vessels and they are connected and the tie is cut after having relieved it of all sides of the egg's surface, and if the egg has been covered by those swelling limbs.
It is recommended that the egg be removed and cut, and if there is adhesion between something in the bags or between the vessels, it is recommended that all of this adhesion be relieved and cut in a careful manner.
If the meat is in a position of adhesion that is from behind, it is recommended that all of it be cut and the egg be expelled as we said, if you do it, clean the wound with soap and water in the grease and alcohol and then treat it with other treatment until it is relieved.
The fourth and seventh section.
In the treatment of the wound with a dressing.
The operation is a division of the testicle, similar to a ring but with relaxation of the female, causing difficulty in movement and sports and walking, and in treating this condition of pain, it is close to what has been mentioned.
However, it is better to mention the work done by the early ones, and I say that it is better for the patient to sit on a raised chair, then push the female's thigh downwards, then hold the skin of the groin with your fingers while the nearby veins are near the testicle.
Then, a servant not you will hold it wide and then stretch it with a narrow blade that spreads the veins of the hose until the veins are revealed, then squeeze from all sides as mentioned in the threads in the groin, then insert an instrument in it with a smooth thread.
Then, tie it in the first position it was exposed to by the division and also tie it in the last one, then stretch it in the middle a stretch that is based on the length of the body and expel what gathered in it of the dry, spoiled acids.
Then, treat the patient with the treatment of other surgeries you want to give birth to a period for the veins that nourish one of the women, as it is desired, because the division exposed all the veins, it is better for the egg to leave with the veins so as not to starve the fetus. Before cutting the vessels, it should not be done without a reason.
The fifth and sixth chapter.
In the treatment of chronic cystitis.
This cystitis occurs due to a rupture in the bladder wall, which extends along the abdomen from the two corners of the abdominal wall to one of the women's sides.
And this rupture can be either due to a tear in the abdominal wall or due to its extension, and this type of cause has many causes such as hitting, constriction, sneeze, or lifting something heavy, and its sign is that if it is due to the extension of the abdominal wall, it happens very slowly over a long period of time.
Nor does it happen suddenly and the tumor is advanced towards the depth of the abdomen before the bladder constricts, and its sign is that if it is due to a rupture in the bladder wall, it happens first with great pain and the tumor is different, appearing under the skin near.
And this is due to the bladder exiting and its destination outside the abdomen, and the bladder may exit with the rupture, and this cystitis is called bladder and rupture cystitis, and it may occur in the bladder and cause death therein.
For a difficult and painful wound, especially if it is deep, and the treatment of such wounds with iron is dangerous, it is advisable to warn against the risk of infection. The description of the operation is to command the surgeon to take the discharge from his hand and insert it into the patient's chest if he comes for a recurrence.
Then he lies on his side with his legs between your hands and raises his knees, then the skin that follows the incision is raised all over, and all of it is sharpened on the edge of the knife as much as needed to open the wound with it.
The wound should be as large as the egg can come out of it, then sharpen the needles that are under the skin until if the white hard needle breaks from both sides, then insert your little finger's thumb into the hole.
Between the white needle under the egg skin and the second needle, shoot the clamp with the back of the egg, then press your right hand into the skin from inside, and at the same time raise the white needle to the outside with your left hand and lift the egg with the needle to the side of the wound.
The servant is ordered to beat the egg to the top and then tie it with the tie that is thrown away completely and spread it with your finger to make sure there is nothing of the salty white powder in the hard white bag, if you find something in it, pull it to the belly below.
Then take a needle in it a thick thread that has been cut from ten threads and enter it at the last bag under the skin of the shoulder that follows the thigh, then cut the ends of the thread until four threads remain. Then tie some of them on top of each other and tie it to the bag that we said is under the skin of the thigh with a strong knot from both sides, then also tie the ends of the threads and tie it with a strong knot so that nothing from the vessels that are fed by it can reach it. To prevent it from being exposed to heat and to make the second knot outside the first one, more than two fingers apart, then take from the bag that is under the skin of the shoulder the bone of the finger that measures its size.
To prevent it from being exposed to heat and to make the second knot outside the first one, more than two fingers apart, then take from the bag that is under the skin of the shoulder the bone of the finger that measures its size. And cut the rest of it according to the pattern and remove the egg from it, then make a cut under the skin that leads the blood and the time as we described earlier, then use the ointment-covered cloth in the wound and put the knot in the wound and use the second knot that we described.
The white gauze that we cut with caution to prevent bleeding often exposes it much, and leaves the tendon until it falls on its own, as soon as it falls, dip it in hot water and carry on it what drips until it falls.
Then, treat the wound with other surgical remedies until it heals.
The sixth and seventh sections.
In this wound, this wound, I have never seen anyone who abandoned its treatment with copper, as mentioned by the first that it should be made as we described in the wound with a hole and that the vessels should be tied below after cutting them.
Then, cut in the middle and treat the tumor with what opens until the vessels fall and treat the wound as we mentioned until it heals.
The seventh and eighth sections.
In the incision that is in the thigh.
The incision in the thigh may be placed as we said, and it does not descend to the women's part and if it descends, it is slow and returns in all times.
But if time passes, the cut in the gauze increases until the groin and the throb in the thighs are exposed due to the extension of the gauze that is in the thigh as we said. The surgical instrument is extended and then relaxed, and the position is determined and treated as previously described.
The wound may be treated with iron on this basis, which is to relax the gallbladder on its back by your hands, then make a position for the warm and clean gallbladder slit open in front on the palm of three fingers, and then tie the slits under the skin.
Until the white gallbladder that follows is opened, you will take a stethoscope and place it on the position of the gallbladder, then wrap it around the abdomen, and then cut the two sides of the gallbladder slit on the stethoscope with the help of the cord.
Then you will loosen the stethoscope's side and do not cut the gallbladder slit or break the egg, nor anything else as I informed you in treating the respiratory diseases, then treat it with surgical treatment.
If the threads are cut, they should be removed and smoothed until the wound is healed, and the gallbladder will not increase the opening of the slit.
This is the best in this position because it is closest to safety.
The eighth and seventh section.
In relaxing the skin of the nose.
Often the skin of the nose relaxes in some people, not because the meat inside it loosens and changes its appearance, but rather one should prefer to relax the ointment on its surface.
All the skin that relaxes on the smooth skin is cut, and then the edges are stitched together. If you prefer to shave first, shave the relaxed skin with three combs or four, and then cut between the combs.
Then it is treated with other surgical treatments until the threads are removed and fall off.
The ninth and tenth chapters.
In the dissection.
In our religion, dissection is forbidden.
Therefore, I did not mention it in my book, but I mentioned it for two reasons: one to know the knowledge of the surgeon if asked about it, and the other because we often need to dissect some animals for our benefits.
Just like the bearing and the dog, I say that dissection is done either by rubbing or shaking, and the method that is done by rubbing is to put the animal in warm water until it relaxes its female part and becomes smooth and pliant.
She should be held by your hand and the skin covering the wound should be gently grasped with your left hand, then the sutures should be tied and passed through each egg individually.
Even if the eggs are visible, cut them after removing all other strings except the fine one on the vessels, as this cutting from the excision is better than what is left behind.
Because the wound might remain from the females, the animal was gathered together, then the wound was treated until it was cleaned.
Chapter Seven.
Treatment of the cyst.
The cyst can be found in men on two types, one of which it appears in the space or in the skin between females, resembling a woman's vagina with hair and may drain fluid from the one that is in the skin.
In women, there is only one type and it appears above the vulva on the opposite side of the penis, resembling a small phallus that has been ejected from one of them, like the males, and treatment for the three types.
The two types of men and one type of woman should have excess fat cut off until its effect is gone, then treated with other surgical treatments until it is cured. As for the second type of men who expose urine that is in the skin of the groin, there is no work or benefit in it.
The nineteenth and seventh chapters.
In cutting the pubic hair and excess fat from women's bodies.
Pubic hair may increase beyond the natural state until it is shaved and trimmed, and may become more prominent in some women until it spreads like male pubic hair and becomes like a forest.
It is recommended that you hold the pubic hair with your hand or with a scissors and cut it without worrying about the depth of the cut, lest it expose a vein and cause bleeding.
Then treat it with surgical treatments until it is cured, and as for the raw meat, it is meat that grows in the mouth of the camel until it fills it.
It may have gone outside, for example, in the case of sin. Therefore, it is called by some the sinful disease, and it should be cut off like pubic hair, regardless, and treated until it is cured.
The 10th century Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis is divided into two parts, with the second part being the seventh section. This section likely contains detailed information on various surgical procedures and techniques. However, without the specific content of this section, it is difficult to provide a more accurate translation. If you have the specific content, please provide it so I can give a more precise translation.
In treating the hernia. This phrase indicates that the following content will discuss the treatment of hernias. Hernias are a common medical condition where an organ or tissue protrudes through a weak spot in the muscle or connective tissue that holds it in place. The treatment of hernias can vary depending on the type and severity of the hernia, as well as the patient's overall health. Some hernias may be treated with lifestyle changes, while others may require surgical intervention. Without the specific content of the textbook, it is difficult to provide a more detailed translation. If you have the specific content, please provide it so I can give a more precise translation.
A hernia is a protrusion of the abdominal wall, where the muscle or connective tissue is weakened or there is a small bulge in the muscle. This can be either congenital, meaning it is present from birth, or acquired, meaning it develops later in life due to factors such as obesity or strain on the abdominal muscles. The protrusion can be made up of fatty tissue, which is an excess of subcutaneous fat. Without the specific content of the textbook, it is difficult to provide a more detailed translation. If you have the specific content, please provide it so I can give a more precise translation.
The protrusion can also be made up of fatty tissue, which is an excess of subcutaneous fat. This fatty tissue can be found in various parts of the abdominal wall, such as its depth, sides, top, or bottom. It can prevent the abdominal muscles from functioning properly, leading to issues such as constipation, hernia, and even difficulty in childbirth. In some cases, it may also prevent the abdomen from stretching during pregnancy. Without the specific content of the textbook, it is difficult to provide a more detailed translation. If you have the specific content, please provide it so I can give a more precise translation.
If the hernia is visible, it can be treated by palpating it with fingers or a probe. If the hernia is not visible, it can be detected by feeling for a bulge in the abdominal wall near the navel. In this case, the hernia is likely made up of thin fatty tissue and is close to the navel. To treat this type of hernia, the surgeon will make a small incision on the navel and create a flap of skin that resembles a glove. The surgeon will then insert their hand into the abdominal cavity and push the hernia back into its original position. Without the specific content of the textbook, it is difficult to provide a more detailed translation. If you have the specific content, please provide it so I can give a more precise translation.
The woman lies on her side with her legs open, then the scissors are pressed with strength until they pierce the thin fabric and open the valve. Then she takes some gypsum and puts it in the oil, places it on the spot, and the woman comes every day to prevent the spot from being pierced again.
If the abscess is hard and dense, it should be lanced with a narrow scalpel resembling paper, and if the valve is made of lean meat, it should be tied with needles and cut. Then you will have medications to stop the bleeding, such as quinine, soy sauce, and ghee, which form a group of egg whites.
Then use a wide lead pipe to prevent the wound from closing quickly, hold it for days, and use a raw caterpillar juice, then treat other treatments for hematoma until it is completely removed, and there may be another plant growing on this spot, so cut it off at this point.
If it were not for cancerous, the cancerous tumor in the abdomen would not be exposed to the iron needle.
The third and seventh chapter.
In the treatment of boils, thrombosis, and red blood spots that appear in women's private parts.
Ear plugs, also known as nasal packing, involve closing the nostrils of the nose until a large amount of blood flows out. If the ear plugs are inserted, they turn into turbinates. It has been mentioned in the classification of their types and symptoms, which we will mention here.
What is treatable by ear plugs and what is not, I say that ear plugs and turbinates, if they are in the depth of the nose and have not been visible to the senses, do not require silver treatment and nothing has been placed on them in the nose of the nose. It is the one that treats it.
It is preferred that a woman enters a cold room and then dilates the turbinate with a blunt or sharp knife, cuts it from its root, and leaves it on her when she bleeds from one of the non-throbbing arteries of the blood.
Like the pills, the snuff, and the lavender, then raise your legs to the wall for an hour, then dip them in cold water if the bleeding persists, then sit on the hem of the sleeve and the buttons of the collar and the cuff, and so on, then grind a teaspoonful of wheat flour with honey and chalk.
And it is placed on her back if the bleeding stops, or else the firm, non-pregnant uterus and ovaries are required, then take a piece of soap and dip it in the plaster of Paris or the plaster of the fetal mouth or the plaster of the eyelids with the drink of vinegar and adjust the position.
If the tumor is empty, treat the area with mercury until it is cleared, and as for the red blood, it resembles the heads of a radish, smooth in appearance. It is recommended to cut off what is visible of it according to what was mentioned in the thalliel, whether it is treated until it is cleared.
The fourth chapter and seventeenth section.
In the corner of the eyelid that is exposed in the eye.
Various types of tumors may be exposed in the eye, such as cancer and firm tumor, cysts and boils, ulcers and abscesses, corns and callosities, thalliels and hard tumors. All diseases and their types and symptoms have been mentioned in the classification.
It is recommended to mention the hard tumor that is exposed in the eye, if it is a tumor that accumulates in its corner for a long time, then it is recommended to look at it because if the pain of the tumor is severe at the beginning with swelling and redness, then it is a sign of a hard tumor.
I saw it red and if it was affected by heat, do not touch it and treat it with what is recommended for the skin until the symptoms disappear, then it is recommended that the woman sits on a chair with her feet on it and leans on her back.
The woman's thighs gather at her lower abdomen, her feet protrude from the sides, and her arms extend under her hips, tied together by a band that adjusts.
Then the patient should sit from the right side and use the device that opens the rectum, which will then appear in its subsequent form. It is recommended to measure the depth of the woman's rectum if you intend to use this device, otherwise the part that enters through the device may be deeper than the depth of the rectum.
The probe hurts the patient if the device is deeper than the depth, it is recommended to place the teeth on the jaw of the rectum to prevent the entire device from entering the depth of the rectum, and it is recommended that the probe that is performed in the device comes from the upper side.
And you hold the device and the servant performs the probe until the rectum opens, if the foreskin appears with your hand and it is soft, it is recommended to remove it at the head of the rectum with a wide gauze, if the whole time has passed.
It is recommended that a thin, greased linen or green oil be placed in the wound, and the linen should be exposed outside the suture at the head of the rectum, and the grease will be exposed on the outside of the rectum and the anus, and it will be greasy soap mixed with water that has become stagnant.
After two days, treat the wound with the appropriate ointment until it is clean.
The wound may be cleaned by rinsing it with water and sugar, then with water that has boiled pomegranate seeds or long zaranud in it, and then return to the ointment. If the incision is circular inside the wound, the ointment will be applied.
It is preferred to stop treating the wound with mercury and instead use what we mentioned in the division.
The fifth and seventh chapter.
In the teaching of poultices, how they treat alive animals if they come out of their natural form.
It is preferred for the poultice to know first the natural form of childbirth, among its signs if you see the woman leaning down and covering her mouth with the air and wheezing on it what is on her chest.
And the child's exit is faster, know that this childbirth is in its natural form and the exit is from his head and the swelling with him or around it, if you see these signs then it is preferred to stop the belly to make the child exit quickly.
And if it comes out from his head, the swelling comes with him and cleans well, and nothing is left of this childbirth except that it is not natural and abnormal because the child may come out from his hands and his hands come out before his head and his feet.
A single hand or foot, or the head with one hand, or the back with one foot, maybe twisted on their own limbs, and in this way, from the various unusual shapes, it is recommended that the patient be cautious with all of these things and warns against mistakes.
I am certain of all forms of it and how the trick is in it to support it, and stand on it if the child was born from the woman's head naturally and became severe on her, making it difficult for her to deliver, I saw her strength weakened then I sat her on a chair and ordered women to hold her.
She was wrapped in a cooked laibah and soaked adhan, then the patient entered between her fingers with a small sponge to wipe away the sweat or wipe it with her nail until all the moisture is removed from her belly and the woman's stomach contracts until the child is born.
If the child does not come out, it is recommended that the woman be given a mixture of laibah and sherbet, then ordered to sweat and rub her face and mouth with kandis after the application, and if the child is born earlier, it is recommended that the hands and feet of the child be slightly warmed.
If the woman does not enter, place her on the threshold and lift her raised leg, then pound the threshold on the ground. The woman should hold on tightly to avoid falling off the threshold, as if she were inside, the hands would cut the fetus and the rest of the fetus would be drawn away.
If the hands are released, pull them gently and they will come out, as the fetus comes out on the man's leg, if the fetus comes out on the man's leg then it is better to push them up a little and turn the fetus slightly until it is straightened, and then take one of the legs and spread it slightly.
If the feet come out, make her lie down and dab with kandsa, as it comes out, but if it does not come out as we described or the fetus is very small, then gently pull it until it is in its natural form, and it will come out smoothly, if it does not come out as we described.
Take from the gutting knife and the lancet, anoint the sabun with a soluble solution, beat all on the mortar, then pour it over the woman's face and belly, and place her in warm water until the sharpened edge is reached.
If I perceive that it is below there, I will create a support for it from the marble and bear its weight. If I hold the support, an hour, I will sit it on the stool, then I will moisten it and stop its nostrils and throat, and narrow its abdomen at the lower part, a thin slice. For the fetus to emerge from its hour, the emergence of the fetus from its side and hands.
If it emerges from this position, let it be gently with the hands of the man a little, then the woman will lie down on her knees and lower her feet on the bed, facing away from the bed, and she will take her hands and then narrow its abdomen a little. Then remove what is below its legs until it is tightened at the bottom, if the fetus has not emerged, take both of its legs and make a strong movement then narrow its thighs a little until the fetus goes above then the woman's hand enters and straightens the fetus a little.
And order the woman to give birth, the emergence of the fetus, the fetus emerges with its hand extended to one of its hands, enter it into the palm of the other hand if she cannot hold it, make the woman lie down and make her walk if she cannot walk, then let her lie on her side.
The patient was placed on her side, and the surgeon then applied pressure to her leg, causing a severe pain. He then took some threads from the fabric bag, laid them on a flat surface, and stitched them in place to shape the fetus naturally, and relieved the woman's discomfort. He ordered her to continue until the baby is born.
The baby's head emerged through the birth canal, with its face towards the mother's chest. The willing woman should hold the baby's hand, then gently turn and adjust it slightly, and place it on her belly. If the baby leans forward, she should hold the grease and threads mentioned earlier.
Then she should gently move a little, if she does, place her on the couch and order her to lean towards the right side. Then she should continue until she is exhausted and wipe the baby with a cloth, as it will be born. The baby is delivered firmly, lying on one side.
If the baby falls into the mouth of the mother in this position with the crowning, the mother should wipe the baby's face and neck with a clean cloth to remove any moisture. She should then cut the umbilical cord if it does not retract on its own, and place the baby inside until it is ready.
The woman is ordered to give birth multiple times because it is easy. The twin or multiple offspring are expelled, know that twins often reproduce and can have three or four, but they do not survive unless in a high altitude. Five offspring is something outside of nature and does not live.
Surround them and know that if they are many, they will separate into one group and form a barrier between them, stuck in a cord in each one of them. And as the single fetus emerges, it emerges naturally and easily, and they emerge with a difficult delivery as we have described.
If some of them are difficult to give birth, it has become as we have said from non-natural shapes, treat them as we have described, and make it suitable for a gentle touch and do what you can with your hand on all shape with whatever is beneficial for it from the safety guide.
Mention what is imagined in the womb of the fetus to fall, it may be imagined in one and two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and I have heard that a woman fell seven and another five thirteen all of them were imagined like that.
In the wise and learned opinion, all of this should be applied in the field of surgery, as it may happen that one day it will be replaced by something more appropriate.
The 70th Chapter.
In the extraction of the dead fetus.
If the dead fetus is treated as mentioned in the classification of treatment, it did not come out and you were forced to perform the operation with your hand. It is advisable that you look, if the woman is strong and has no symptoms that she fears from them, it is advisable that the woman lies on her side on her stomach.
And the head should be tilted downwards and the thighs raised, and a pillow or bandage is tied to both sides or attached to the bed so that the body does not sag when the fetus moves.
Then, moisten the mouth of the patient with wet ointment mixed with poppy seeds and slippery elm and turmeric, then cleanse the vagina with this ointment and seeds, then enter the fetus into the vagina in a suitable position where the incisors of the fetus can be found.
Look, if the fetus is coming out on top of its head, the teeth will be found in its eyes, or in its mouth, or in its nose, or under its chest, or in the surrounding areas of the thighs, or under the clothing.
When the surgeon operates on the legs, it is recommended to hold the scalpel with the left hand and rest its blade between the thumb and index finger of the right hand, and then make a cut in some of those mentioned areas with the scalpel.
Until it reaches something empty, then cut alongside it with another or third scalpel, ensuring the incision is even and does not lean towards a direction, and then make the cut in a level manner but also move it to all directions.
This makes the exit easier as it is made with a scalpel at the tip and it is recommended that the cut be tilted, so that some fingers are greased and enter from one side to move the placenta to other positions if some of the fetus comes out.
It is done very slightly so that the whole fetus comes out, if one hand withdraws before the other it cannot be returned for squeezing, it is recommended to make a cut on it and then attract it until it is completely cut off if all of it comes out.
Either in the knee joint or in the tendon, it is recommended to do it in the other hand and in both legs, if the head of the fetus is large and has pressure on the exit or if there is water in its head, it is recommended to insert between the fingers a shaking hook.
The head is dissected by removing the water or pressing it with the instrument called the mashdakh, which produces an image of other instruments in the following chamber.
Similarly, if the fetus has a large head, it is preferable to dissect or grind the skull with the mashdakh as we have said, then remove the bones with the callips. If the head is pushed out during delivery, continue dissecting until moisture is deposited in the chest.
The chest then joins, and if the chest does not join and there is no exit, just cut as much as you can, whether it is below the abdomen or has a hole in it, and it is preferred to close it until moisture is excreted from it.
If the fetus is on its sides, it is easy to draw and straighten it to the mouth of the womb, and if it presses on the abdomen or chest, it is preferred to draw it with a break by putting your hand on it and dissecting the abdomen or chest until what is in them is excreted.
If all the organs are removed and the head is raised, insert your right hand into the vagina if the mouth of the womb is open, then grasp the head with your hand and draw it to the mouth of the womb using your fingers, then insert a speculum or two specula and draw it with them.
If the mouth of the patient has become swollen and hot, it is not appropriate to hurt it, but rather it is recommended to use moist and slimy things, apply alum, and sit in the water that flows.
If the fetus is on one side, it may be possible to straighten it by using what we mentioned for the living fetus. If that is not possible, it should be cut into pieces and removed. It is recommended not to leave any of the moisture inside the womb, if you have stopped treating yourself, use what we mentioned for the treatment in hot wounds that are exposed in the uteri.
If the bleeding of blood descends into the receding water and all the treatment is used, I have seen a woman who gave birth to the fetus in her womb and then wrapped it again.
Then, the other fetus also died and was presented to her after a long time, it was wrapped in her womb and expanded until it opened and made the clitoris extend. I advised her to treat it for a long time, she treated it, but the wound did not heal, she placed some strong attractants on it.
He then left the position and a bone came out, then days passed and another bone came out, I was surprised because the abdomen is not supposed to have bones in it, I estimated that it was a bone of the dead fetus, I searched the wound and took out many bones from the skull of the fetus.
I never ceased to follow this until I extracted many bones from her and the woman was in the best of health. And she had lived for such a long time in that position, her hip was walking, and this is quite rare.
Because there is knowledge and assistance for what the surgeon tries to do with his hand in treatment.
The 7th and 70th section.
In it are images of the devices that he needs for the extraction of the fetus.
A picture of a lancet that opens in the mouth of the mother.
This device that balances the books, either with a needle or a piece of bark, and its width is equal to the width of the finger.
And the shape of them is like a finger, their length is half a thumb or more, and their width is equal to a finger or more, and these two sticks.
These are the ones that enter into the mouth of the mother to open it with your lancet, a picture of another device that is finer and smaller.
It is made from a piece of bark or bark, but it has two sticks as you see, the length of each stick is half a thumb and the width is equal to a finger, if you want to open the mother's mouth with it.
Position the woman on a mannequin with her legs spread, then insert these protrusions into the patient's mouth and hold one end of the device below between their thumbs. Then open your hand with the device as you would with a pair of pliers, however much you want to open the mouth. Until you create what you want, here's another image of the other hand mentioned earlier:
Image of the instrument used to push the fetus:
Image of the forceps used to grasp the fetal head:
It resembles the mouth of a tooth as you see, and may look like a pair of pliers on this image as it has teeth like those of a saw, cut through it and pull it out:
Image of the forceps used to push the fetus:
Image of the scalpel used for cutting:
This scalpel has a small notch to prevent it from breaking when the fetus is grasped with it, image of a scalpel with handles:
Image of wide blades for cutting the fetus:
These tools have become more varied over time and were made by the craftsman according to his skill, and are not necessary for you to have as they are not always needed.
Chapter 8 and Section 7.
After the operation of the incision.
If the wound becomes closed after the incision, it is recommended that you ask the midwife to hold herself firmly, then anesthetize her with snips and place your hand on her mouth and chin, and if she opens it widely, it is good; otherwise, take a measure.
Secure the cover with a nail and place a pinched-open tube of the drug (such as fenugreek, senna, mugwort, baboon's tail, slimy dock, and cantharides) in the cover of the wound and the other side in the mouth of the patient.
Hold the cover until the water reaches the root of the wound, then anesthetize as we have said, because if the wound is still closed after this treatment and has not opened, the midwife should moisten her left hand with ointment or ointment of the hazel.
Then enter the wound with her hand and spread it a little, until it opens, if it is attached to the depth of the womb, then insert your hand as we have described until you find the wound and draw it slightly on the cure.
Do not let the ram's horn fall during severe drawing, but rather it should be gently guided towards the curved and soft sides. Then, the force of drawing increases, and it responds at this time, freeing itself from the fixation. If the ram's horn is combined, we have described the treatment as cauterization and the treatment of the wound and the hematoma.
If not all that we have described does not come out and the force of the re-drawing, then it is recommended that what came out be tied to the ram's horn of the woman, then it should be inoculated with the four-drop mercury, as it heals after a few days.
It should come out and leave unless it is inoculated, as it then emits a repulsive smell from the abdomen and head, which disturbs the patient. Therefore, it is recommended to use the appropriate pitch.
Therefore, some early practitioners tried pitch and resin, images of the device that the woman uses when experiencing abstinence and menstruation, and similar to this:".
It is made from pitch that resembles the restraint or from a thin piece of wood placed on the thin and wide side of the belly and placed on fire, the smoke is inhaled while holding it until the smoke is extinguished and the rest is reapplied.
The 9th chapter and 7th section.
In the treatment of the unbent arrow.
Many children may have unbent arrows and they may clog the sieve with a thin cloth. It is recommended for the skilled person to bend that cloth with their finger, otherwise they can tie it with a thin ribbon and be careful not to hurt the muscle.
Then she places a magnesia stone in the drink and oil, and treats it with mercury until it comes out, because she was afraid that a lead pipe would clog the sieve for many days and would break when the child wanted to take it out.
And the clogging of the arrow may also be due to an abscess or a wound, so it is recommended to drain that abscess and then treat it with what we have mentioned for the treatment and mercury.
The 8th chapter.
In the treatment of the nodules that occur at the bottom.
The nodules that occur at the bottom are hard and prominent, they occur near the arrowhead outside or in the space from one side and it is a single or more than one nodule.
If this hardness opens and moisture with a white or thin watery humidity comes out, it may be one of the nodules that is inclined to the base and the side, and it may not be inclined. The inclined one is known by what comes out of it when the bell and the wind are used.
It may happen that the drill escapes from it, and it may be a pin from the space freely moving in the abdomen and in the course of the shaft and may be free to the toe muscle and to the bladder, and what is known as the free pin from the seat is not free.
Insert your thumb index finger into the seat and insert a thin rod into the drill made of bone or iron if the drill does not have a bearing, then if it has a bearing, insert a thin lead rod or a hair from the horse's mane.
Until you feel the rod or the hair in your thumb, if you do not feel any movement from the pin and nothing shines from the drill's head, no wind or dough as we said, then know that it is not free and proceed with treatment.
And if the drill is free from the abdomen or the course of the bladder, the sign is the escape of the urine from it and its rejection of the position by the drugs, and if it is free from the toe muscle or the bladder, the symptom is the arrival of the rod at this point.
If there is no bearing in the bone and pain in that direction with permanent exit of dung from it, and there is no treatment or rejection by the bladder, then all these free pins are not free from the point.
For the treatment of the false case, which is caused by the incompetence of doctors, and for those that are not enfeebled and not chronic, it is recommended to remove them by means of a surgical instrument, specifically a hammer, as I have described and as has been tried, and this involves placing the false piece between your hands on its face.
The thighs should be lifted up and the leg should be inclined towards its abdomen, then insert a curette or a lead probe, if it is in the handle, until you reach where the curette ends, and if the false piece approaches the seat, it is recommended that you insert your little finger into the seat.
If you feel the curette in your finger, it has been carried out by itself without you feeling between your finger and it, at which point you should be aware that it is enfeebled and not a removal, so do not tire yourself with it, as we have said.
Some have said that it removes in some people in the emaciated and as part of the treatment that is recommended for the benefit, to cover a thin layer according to the size of the handle and to insert it into the handle until it reaches the seat, then it is returned twice or thrice.
Until you learn that all those surplus fatty meats, which resemble a bird's tail feather, have been burned, then treat them with a mixture of sand until they come out, and then treat them with salt, if it is whole, then it is clean.
And if it does not come out completely, it will never be clean, and if it enters the seat, it did not reach your thumb and there was a thick veil of meat or cloth between it and the catapult, and you saw the lion's head on the skin surface, the skin split when this happened from the first lion's head. And you pass through the split with the catapult while it is in the lion's mouth until you reach the split where the end of the catapult meets and the catapult falls, then you clean the surplus fatty meats that resemble a bird's tail feather and nothing remains of them.
Then treat it with salt until it is clean, for your blood and condition between you and your work to cut that fatty meat is best that you make and fastest benefit of it by fire or strong medicine because the fire combines two good conditions, burning that surplus fatty meat.
Cut the veins and cleanse the exudations, then treat the wound with a poultice of bread soaked in linseed oil or turmeric powdered with olive oil until the area is healed, and remove the burnt meat from the wound, then treat the wound with a salt-soaked sponge from solid meat.
These drugs contain astringents and cleanse, for if they are applied too much they do not heal and cause inflammation upon return, and if the applicator has reached the depth of the seat and below the surface of the body, insert your finger into the seat and examine it with it.
If you feel the applicator and between it and it is a veil of bread or meat, and it is near the gout, then the work in it is only on the way of the taste and request, because you will use it with one of three aspects, either to wrap as we said.
Or if you shave it until its root is reached to be able to insert the poultice and treat from a distance, do not cut the surrounding muscle of the seat lest it speaks of the wound without intention, then treat it as we mentioned, it may heal as we said.
Or if you cut that veil and wrap it after shaving it to the root of the seat as we said, either with the applicator or another sharp tool, then remove the burnt meat that is left in the shave all the way you can by probing.
Then, the surgeon removes the entire incision with the scalpel and the upper jaw until it heals, leaving the nasal opening open inside the bench, which is the most delicate part, and the nasal septum may damage on this form.
And if the probe entered the nose and was on the side of the bench near the surface of the body, with the skin and the edge of the bench, then a curved probe like a hook was used on this image:....
And inserted a loose thread of five threads or so, then inserted the probe with the thread into the nose until it reached its root, if it was loose inside the bench from within, near the edge.
And then, pull out the thread from that hole by inserting your finger into the bench and pulling apart the two sides of the thread, all of them strengthened and left to dry for a day or two, whenever you cut the meat in between the two sides of the thread, it will break and fall, then treat the wound until it heals and comes out.
And if the nasal septum was not loose, it would have to be broken in order for it to be deep inside the body, and you cannot do that for the muscle otherwise you will cut it, then make it as we mentioned until it heals.
The image of the drill that cuts through the bones is sharp and severe on one side, and the other side is not severe to avoid cutting off what is not needed, as you see.
The ninth chapter is the eighth book.
In the midst of the bones through which the blood flows, cutting them, and treating fractures.
The bones should be on two sides, either inside the chair, resembling openings like blood, or like grapes, with small and large ones, and blood flows from them permanently.
One is large and many, outside the chair, with the exception that this one outside the chair is less wet, blood flows from it, yellow or little blood, and it is on the color of the body.
And the treatment of that inside the chair is to make the allium glow and become lively until it leaves the chair and reveals the cushion, then wrap it with the sandals or hold it with your fingers, then cut it at its roots, if the sandals do not stick to it due to moisture and fatigue.
Tie it with a rough knot or a piece of polished glass, or attract it with your fingers, then cut it, then remove some sharp roots from it so that the ground or the base of the plant stands upright on what is in front of the door.
Then he treated her with all other remedies until she was cleansed, if not, inject a small amount of the ointment into it to wash off whatever is on the seat and to speed up its departure when the ointment starts to ooze, then the external ointment outside the seat is easy to apply.
And it is that she takes it with her hands or ties it with a needle and cuts it, then she treats it as we mentioned until it is cleansed, and if one dislikes cutting with iron, it is recommended to use the copper on this type of wound. Take a loose thread and insert it into the needle.
Then she draws the thaler upwards and pushes it through the needle from the other side, and the ends of the thread are bent down below the needle and are perpendicular, the thaler is tightened and elongated, then she ties the thread and pulls out the needle, she does this with all the thaliers and leaves one that is not cut.
To make it bleed, then place a soothing ointment or lotion on the seat and leave it on the seat and order the ointment to be quiet, then leave it until it falls if it falls, then treat it with the moxa and all other remedies until it is cleansed.
For the treatment of fractures, many times the toes of the big toe and the tightening of the toe bind, if it does not improve with medicine, it is recommended to dry it with the sandal's sole or with your thumb until it becomes moist and removes from it the upper part of the nail that prevents it from being immersed.
Then, treat it until it subsides to what is desired, if it does not subside then repeat it with a more intense drying than the first until it becomes wet and exudes. Then, it will be cured, as it will be cleansed.
The second chapter and eighteenth.
In the treatment of inverted and non-inverted nails, thick toenails, and mites.
The nail is only a fine ring on the skin that resembles the head of the nail and it is present in all parts of the body, especially in the soles of the feet and fingers, and it causes pain when walking.
It is recommended that the area around the nail be removed and held with a tweezer or a hairpin, and then it should be treated. If you want to remove it from its place, then it is one of the thick, rough, fine nails on the skin surface.
Many times, the boys' hands are shown and treated by cutting or shaving the thumb nail, or trimming it with a silk thread or a hair, until it falls off, and if desired, can be placed on fire or with strong medicine.
The hairs that have grown and not grown have been removed by the instrument I remember in treating warts, and as for warts, they are also small, hard, protruding bumps on the surface of the body going deep into the depths and if they are affected by cold, they feel like thorns of the hedge.
In the body, and especially in the hands, and treating it is to take a tube from a strong cat's fur or a scorpion's tail and make that tube circle around the wart until you cover the corners of the tube with your hand until you cut around the wart.
It will be inside the meat and the wart will disappear from its original place, and if you want, do this with a glass or iron tube on this picture:".
The top of the tube should be open and loose to make it easy for the fingers to hold and turn it, and if you want to place the wart on what is presented in the door of the thumb nail,".
The third and eighteenth chapter.
In the chapter on instruments used for enema, clyster, and purgative in the treatment of hernia.
The enema tube may be made of silver, brass, or copper, and can be made in various sizes according to the users' needs. The enema tubes used in the treatment of infants and those with narrow or concave seats should be large-sized, and their nozzles should be flat and wide. Here is an example of a large-sized enema tube:
The upper part of the tube where the stopper is located should be wide, with a barrier to prevent the stopper from falling out. The lower part of the tube, which enters the hernia bag, should be smooth and well-polished, with two screws on one side and one screw on the other.
The screw on the hernia bag should be tight or slightly loose, and the plug that contains the drugs should be made of animal plasma or fine thread and have a small diameter.
The plugs should be tightened and spaced widely, with a narrow finger-like projection between each plug. A thin thread made of ten spokes or similar is inserted into the plug, which collects the drugs in the hernia bag. When the drug is placed in the middle of the blade between two thin pieces of wood, and then it is sutured, this is the shape of a circular incision and a thrush.
The way to suture it is to fill the wound or abscess with drug and make sure it is not too high in risk of gangrene, and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold, then let the gangrene lie on its back and turn its legs upwards.
Under it, a poultice or ointment is placed, then the side of the suture is coated with ointment or egg whites or hen's eggshells or similar, and it is inserted into the cavity in the same direction, then the servant of the incision takes it with both hands and cuts it very sharply until all that is inside the suture is in the cavity.
Then the suture is removed and the gangrene turns its legs to the wall, because the drug causes its exit, so take what you can, and if it slept all night with the gangrene, then the suture was for the diarrhea and accelerated its exit, so continue the suture until it is clean.
If it is in the cavity surrounded by or hard ulcers, then the suture should be very gentle and smooth, and this is a picture of a gentle and careful suture on his skin.
Chapter Fourteen and Eighteen.
In the treatment of surgeries.
The surgeries differ according to the thing that is present in the surgery and according to the position where the wound is located.
The things that are present in the surgeries are many, such as stone chips, sword cuts, spear wounds, stab wounds, arrow wounds, and similar things.
And the surgeries according to the positions of the body are the wounds that occur on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, and similar parts.
I am describing the treatment of some surgeries to make them a standard and law for all surgeries, and I start with head surgeries, especially because the mechanism will be mentioned in the first chapter of this book's third part.
I say that when a simple head wound occurred and there was no fracture of the bone, and it was a stone chip or similar, and the skin was only bruised, and the wound was large, and I feared the formation of cancer, I immediately removed the quilt from the place. Do not delay in removing blood from the vein according to its strength, unless it obstructs the flow of blood coming out of the wound, as the danger is from the direction opposite to the incision.
The physician warns against excessive drinking and heavy foods, as avoiding food will prevent intoxication. Do not bring near the wound if it happens with a hot cloth in ointment alone or with alcohol that contains a pinch.
If the wound is hot, place it on the wound if it has not changed its color and the air has not changed it immediately, but if it has changed, place a little cooling on it.
Until the wound is stretched and treated until it is clean, if the wound is large and was caused by cutting with a knife or similar and the wound has not healed with the bandages, collect it with the suture on the abdominal surgical bandage.
If the skin is loose and has not been tightened except in a bandage that moves, cut it and treat the wound with drugs to replace the hard skin with soft skin and the physician advises eating foods that contain elasticity such as heads and necks and similar.
If a pustule appears on the skin but is not attached to bone, it should be completely cut off and then dressed. If in these surgeries there is a vein or a blood vessel that bleeds but does not stop with medication, it should be searched for.
If the wound does not heal, it should be dressed with a poultice and tied up. If necessary, it should be cut open until it stops bleeding. If these surgeries are simple and easy, they can be treated by simply closing the wound with its blood.
Before the air changes, the wound should be dressed with a mixture of gum, part of the sinew, and part of the soft or hard fat. All of this should be rubbed on the wound to close it well and make it heal quickly and firmly by tying a good bandage on it.
Then the blood should be let down from above with rue and left to dry until it is clean, as long as it does not absorb the medicine, and the fat can do this alone if the gum and sinew are not available.
This action can also be done on the eyebrow in many large surgeries if it is skillfully placed and tied, and the wound was not changed by the air, but if the air has changed some of it, especially in summer.
Do not consider this thorn to have a meaning for its treatment as we mentioned, that it carries some sharp edges or it carries a pin made of flour made with water and sugar until the wound is filled, then treat it with other treatments until it is clean.
And what if the wound occurs in the leg and it is slow? Attract it with a tap, and as you mentioned the treatment of wounds in the temple, in surgery, if the wound occurs in the temple, it is not different in treatment from a wound in the head if it is simple.
And if a nerve or thread has been cut from the temple, and it is a nerve, then there is no need to avoid treating it with something that tightens like the grappling hook and the noose, for it harms the nerve and crushes it.
Do not put something cold on the wound, for the essence of the nerve is cold and its connection to the brain, which is the most important organ, and what is treated with the cold drugs like the nourishing salt water that has been boiled multiple times with oil or oiled with ghee and rose and cotton, is not suitable.
And if you clean it with the acid water and all other metal stones and the damp ones, and if the wound is large, use the suture or apply the wound with the ointment and treat it until it is clean.
In case of surgery, if a wound occurs and it is located at the lowest point, and if the vein that was cut within the wound stops bleeding and becomes firm or is tied, or is sealed, it is necessary to do so.
If the wound was caused by cutting some of the tendons of the Achilles or all of them, and the blood clot has stopped, then gather the edges of the skin with a thread on the tendon and do not touch the tendon but lift it and place it in its natural form, then tighten it firmly and evenly and leave it for days.
Then treat it with poultices containing astringents and emollients until the wound is cleaned out, if the wound affected the bone then examine it and if there are any fragments of bone in it or what you can manage to take them all or what you cannot, leave them until the wound heals and cleans out and becomes easier to remove.
If the wound is a groove, then leave it open and if pus comes out of the wound and solidifies into a boil, treat it with what is mentioned in that chapter, in abdominal surgery and between the shoulders.
If the wound is caused by a sword or knife and you see blood coming from it, then look and if you see that wind comes out of it when the person breathes, know that it is a combat wound and if it does not have a groove and it was a groove caused by the blood, do not make the incision at the first hole of the poultice and do not tighten it lest the blood clot in the groove.
In the heart, the poison kills the patient, but if you make a small wound and let it heal twice in the day, and if it doesn't heal on the first day, then put a clean cloth in the wound to absorb what comes out of it, and let the patient sleep on the wound.
If nothing happens in the wound, and if three days or more have passed since the injury, and there is no tension, no weakness, and no breathlessness in the patient's chest, and you see all other conditions to be normal, then know that the wound is sound and treat it with a splint and other treatment until it heals.
If it is difficult to see and measure the pulse, then know that the patient has become a "dead man" and treat him from the wound. The patient's chest should not be affected by the wound, and if the injury has been three days or more on the chest or back, treat it with the advised plaster.
If the wound is large or in the joints, and it has affected the bone and cut into it, open the wound and remove the pieces immediately if they are detached, otherwise leave them until they detach.
The wound will heal if it is easy to open, and the same goes for other emergency surgeries on other organs, they are treated according to what we have mentioned.
The fifth and eighteenth section.
In abdominal surgery and the removal of the intestines and their sutures.
The incision that traverses the abdomen may be large or small, and in the middle, it may reveal the removal of an intestine or several intestines, making their introduction and sutures more difficult.
And the small incision may also be difficult from another perspective, as it requires a more difficult suture and the intestine will not enter its position if it is not introduced within an hour, it will swell and become difficult to introduce. Therefore, the middle incision is better because it does not make it difficult to suture the intestine as in these two types.
And know that the suture of the abdomen on four sides of the two sutures has been proven to be suitable for abdominal suture and for sutures in other surgeries of the body and other intestines, but they are specialized for abdominal sutures.
And I will explain it to you as one, describing and explaining, so I say that if the incision is small and something of the intestine comes out of it and it is difficult to suture, it is due to one of two reasons: either the incision is small, as we said, or the intestine is exposed to air before it enters.
If it is necessary, then it should be heated by immersing an icepack or a damp cloth in boiling water alone or having cooked in it dates, almonds, and spices, and then adding the vinegar until it evaporates.
And the drink that contains ginger is better than water alone in dissolving the gas, if you see the gas dissolved, then cool it with water that has been cooked in it ginger or ginger oil, as it will enter easily with that.
If it is difficult to return it after this treatment, then slightly split the cloth with the tool used for splitting the pins and the first treatment if it is better than splitting and only then split when necessary and failure of the trick, and this is a picture of the device:
Its one side should be limited and the other unlimited, and the thin edge is not sharp but slightly rough, it resembles a small soldering iron as you see, if the wound expands and enters the vinegar then its cure should be in its natural form.
Its specific place if possible is best, and if the wound is wide and was below the abdomen then the liga should be placed on its back and make the legs higher than the head, and if it is above the abdomen then make the head and chest higher than the bottom.
Also, if the incision is in one of the sides of the abdomen, make your intention and purpose always to operate on the higher part of the side, and thus it is recommended that it should be used in major surgeries and in medium surgeries.
As for small surgeries, you should place it according to what you are capable of, then prepare in your hands a helper companion who holds the incision with both hands and brings its ends together, then he tears off a piece of the peritoneum after another.
This is the general method of suture, which is to take a needle or several needles on the capacity of the wound, then leave from one end of the incision a piece of gut as thick as the tendons and pass a single needle through the edges of the skin without entering it with a thread. Then, with the two ends of the suture from inside until it is withdrawn from that side, and if the edges of the skin and the suture have been gathered, then wrap a fine thread around the needle several times on both sides until the wound edges come together in a proper way.
Then, leave the thick part of the finger and pass another needle through it, then interlace it with the thread as you did with the first one, but continue doing this until the entire wound is released and the needle is evenly placed between tension and relaxation.
The incision should be made in the middle of the belly and flank, not at the edge of the skin near the neck.
The incision should not quickly cut the meat and close the wound before closing, nor should it be too far from the seam to prevent the wound from closing during sleep and causing discomfort due to uneven closure of both sides of the incision.
Leave it until the wound has closed, as this type of suture is suitable for small surgeries because it can be tied with one or two needles or so.
Or, the second type of suture is to use four needles and two threads to tie them once with a loose thread in the belly and flank, and if you perform this tying, repeat the needle from the same side.
The knot should be loose from the top of the wound so that the suture matches the knot of the sewing thread that the patient uses and makes a knot between each knot, after the little finger is relaxed, and this type of knot is known to everyone.
In this excerpt, the surgeon has operated on a man who had a sacrum wound and the surgical incision was more than a thumb. He had exited through two middle parts of the dung and the fracture was in the middle of the belly.
I treated him after the abdominal incision was closed outside for fourteen hours and the wound healed in about fifteen days. I cared for him until he recovered and lived for many years, handling all situations. The doctors decided that he could not remove the hernia.
It is surprising that I did not treat him with anesthesia because there was no medicine in my position. I covered the wound with a piece of cloth twice a day and promised to clean it with grape wine until it healed.
As for one of the types of surgical dressings, I remember it from the speech of Galen, which is that you start with the dressing on the skin and insert the forceps from outside to inside. If the forceps enter the skin and the muscle that extends along the entire length of the belly, it will straighten.
I left the edge of the incision on the side where I inserted the forceps and it entered the other edge of the incision from inside to outside in the same side of the mareqa from outside to inside. If it enters it again in this side, it enters it a second time from this side of the mareqa.
Remove the flap of the abdominal wall that is on this side and pass the retractor through its other end from inside to outside, and remove it until it reaches the layer of the peritoneum on the opposite side until all of it is removed.
Then, start from this side with the line and the mark on the flap of the abdominal wall in the other side, remove the retractor from the skin and insert it back into that skin with the mark of the peritoneum layer in the other side along with this mark of the miraq.
Remove it from the skin that is on the opposite side, and do it again and do it several times until all of the surgery is done on this model, and this sentence of this fascia that it removes the fascia of the peritoneum for the peritoneum.
Remove the fascia of the abdominal wall from one side with a mark and leave it from the other side until it is released, and the second type of self-fascia that he mentioned is also a saying.
And it is that it removes it on the model that the patients remove it from the surgeons by gathering all parts to their corresponding problems in them and including the flap of the abdominal wall to its other flap and the layer of the peritoneum to its other layer and this is what I mentioned.
The surgeon should insert the needle from the outer side of the incisional scar and push it all the way through to the inside, alone. Then, they should withdraw the needle and insert it again from the outside to the inside in both incisions simultaneously. Finally, they should withdraw it again.
Then, they should withdraw it and insert it again from the inside to the outside in the other incisional scar on the opposite side. This striking of the peritoneum is better than the easy peritoneum, which is the one that is mentioned, as Jalenos said in his words, and some of them said that the peritoneum of the abdomen may be struck with two needles. This is to enter both wounds with a single thread and start by inserting the needle from where you are and pushing it to the other side, and then insert the other needle from the opposite side of it according to the peritoneum of the pubic bone, whether it is easy or not.
Know that if the wound is in the middle of the abdomen, its peritoneum is the hardest among all other parts of the abdomen, and as for the opening of the wound, it is judged according to its opening as the judgment of all surgeries because you will know the wound by touch before the air changes it, and you repeated the stitching and closing of the wound, then hold it with the thumb and index finger.
If the wound has been altered by air, cover it with some gauze that covers it until the threads fall and the suture and needle are removed, then treat it as you would any other wound until it heals.
If you have no medicine, cover the wound with cotton cloth and replace it twice a day as I have informed you until it heals. You will not need further treatment if the wounds are simple, as you fear that the wound may spread pain to the major members.
It is recommended to apply a warm ointment or ointment of rosemary around the areas between the ribs and the breast, and if you feel pain or tightness in that area, often apply it with black wine.
Moreover, if the tightness reaches the chest and becomes a wound, know that what was once hard in the stomach is easiest to heal and what was once soft is hardest to heal.
However, the fasting stomach does not allow healing of wounds that occur in it due to its many branches, hardness, and sensitivity, and if the wound was caused by a deep cut and you noticed it, wrap it according to your belly's response.
If the leg has been injured and the wound is dark or black, it is recommended to cover it with a bandage above the area that is darker, otherwise it may cause bleeding from the veins. In the thigh, there are arteries and veins, then cut off what is below that tendon.
Make the ends of the bandage loose below the incision outside it to make it easier to remove and fall out when the thigh collapses, and mention the wound that is exposed in the groin, but if there is a crack in the groin and it was small.
It may happen that some people believe that a man who was stabbed in his abdomen with a sharp object and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, the wound became infected and a pus came out of it, I treated him without any success. I never stopped caring until the wound was healed and cleaned, when I saw the wound was clean I was afraid that something bad might happen to his insides, but he did not suffer from any infection of the intestines and remained in good condition. It is correct that he eats, drinks, bathes, and enters the bathhouse, and some of the experience witnesses mentioned that when the wound was exposed in the groin and it was small, it is recommended to treat it on this basis.
The large-headed snakes take the heads, then gather their wound closes from the wound surfaces, and if they grasp and constrict them, their mouths cut off their heads, and they do not bleed, then another snake is placed near the first one.
And she continues to do this with several snakes according to the wound, then scarps it and cleans the wound, and those heads remain stuck in the abdomen until the abdomen squeezes and expels without causing any harmful effect, and the abdomen may also get scratched by the fine cut.
The animal that sticks to the Egyptian with a sharp tooth after entering the abdomen, it takes one of its teeth from the Egyptian and then ties it in his tooth a thin loose tooth, and then he puts this tooth in the abdomen. And the Egyptian's tooth gets scratched by the abdomen, and then it goes back to the bone, and this hitting of the tooth by the snake and the Egyptian is only for the sake of tasting and begging.
But if the crack is large and wide, and especially if it is in one of the abdomens that secrete, there is no need for a remedy or a cure for the wound.
The 10th century Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis, in its 6th and 7th sections, discusses various surgical procedures, including the treatment of wounds, fractures, and dislocations. The text emphasizes the importance of sterilization and proper cleaning of instruments to prevent infection. It also highlights the need for careful observation and understanding of the patient's condition before performing any surgical intervention.
In the treatment of wounds and fractures, Albucasis advises the use of appropriate dressings and bandages to promote healing and prevent infection. He also recommends the application of ointments and poultices made from herbs and other natural substances to soothe the affected area and reduce inflammation. In the case of fractures, Albucasis suggests the use of splints and tractions to align the bones and facilitate healing. He also emphasizes the importance of proper positioning and support to prevent further injury and ensure optimal recovery.
According to Albucasis, if a wound or abscess becomes inflamed and develops into an ulcer without healing, it is important to clean the area thoroughly and apply appropriate dressings to prevent infection. He emphasizes that the wound should be kept open and not closed, as this will allow for better drainage of pus and promote healing. If the wound is located on a bone, it is referred to as a fracture, and Albucasis provides specific instructions for treating fractures in his textbook.
In reality, Albucasis states that a white bone fragment that is not painful can be treated with a simple ointment made from herbs and other natural substances. He explains that this ointment helps to soothe the affected area and reduce inflammation, similar to how a feather might be used to soothe a sore throat. Albucasis emphasizes the importance of proper diagnosis and treatment to ensure optimal recovery and prevent further complications.
Therefore, some people refer to this condition as a "feather," and it may be moist and keep the bone open. However, Albucasis notes that the moisture may sometimes evaporate, and in some cases, the moisture may be abundant, scarce, or thick, and thin. He emphasizes the importance of proper diagnosis and treatment to ensure optimal recovery and prevent further complications.
In the division regarding surgeries, it was stated that none of the wounds can be cleaned or anything good grows in them, unless it is due to one of nine causes, either a lack of blood in the body, or its rapid circulation, or the presence of hard meat inside and on the edges that prevents the growth of good meat. Or, they may be many in number and small in size, or the wound itself is light and the matter that covers it is rough and uneven, or the medicine is not suitable for treating it, or there has been corruption in the region of the wound from the species of the boil, or it is particular to the wound.
Or, they may be many in number and small in size, or the wound itself is light and the matter that covers it is rough and uneven, or the medicine is not suitable for treating it, or there has been corruption in the region of the wound from the species of the boil, or it is particular to the wound. Similarly, it was mentioned in the city of Saragossa where diseases are difficult to heal and wounds take a long time to close, which may be due to the presence of a single bone or several bones, and all these causes and symptoms and treatments with drugs were explained in the division.
It would be good for me to know you about the treatment of the nipple and gout, which can be done by hand, know that the nipples can occur in all parts of the body, some of them end up as large and great wounds or veins or nerves.
Or to the arm, or to the thigh, or to the leg, or to the foot from the feet of the trunk, or to the joint from the joints of the articulated limbs, such as the hand and foot, which leads to the near proximity of the head organ and similarly.
What were these narcotics on this scale, they were among the incurable diseases that do not accept treatment and working with them, it is a shame and ignorance, if these narcotics did not reach these locations mentioned and sought to cure them.
And I wanted to reach knowledge of this, took a compass from copper or iron, if the narcotic passes over the straight, examine it with it, if it is in the narcotic, examine it with a thin lead compass because lead is smooth for its body.
When entering and bending towards the narcotic, if the narcotic has many faces that you cannot determine with the compass, then inject from one of its faces because the moisture that fills it passes through its other faces and flows.
Then, perform a thorough inspection on any face you can recognize to see if there is bone or nerve, or if the narcotic is far or near, or if it is a single narcotic with many faces, stand on all of this with the evidence of your suspicious pain in the position.
In this manner, from the evidence and the causes of the tumor, if one stands on all of that and stands on the truth, then it leads to treatment with trust, and that is to look, if it is.
The tumor appears nearby or in a broken position, far from a bone, nerve, tendon, or cord, or one of the mentioned locations, and it splits the tumor from what has been described and extracts what is deformed and excessive meat.
And what comes out of its mouth is not meat or fat and in that manner and treating it until it is cleared, if the tumor is far from the center and was on a straight line, it should be cut in the depth as much as possible, then remove all the deformed meat.
Then use the astringent ointments in the strong medicines and apply them to the center of the tumor that you know with iron, do this several times until the strong medicine consumes all that remains in the center of the tumor.
Then force it with the scarfs that produce good meat correctly until it is cleared, if it does not clear by this then remove it from what has been described and cut it in the depth as told to you if the cause of the tumor is bone and healthy in your hands, then examine and cut it according to what was told to you.
If the bone is exposed as we see, and it contains some decay and putridity, it should be excised until the decay is completely removed, then dressed with what makes it free. If it does not become free and the gauze is left as it was, it should be replaced.
Know that you have not removed all the decay, excavate everything else secondly, extract and clean it with all your effort then force it, if it is clean know that this decay is far from the real decay, excavate everything else.
Extract and clean it with all your effort the decayed bone was a small bone and you could draw it, then draw it with the sharp forceps that are suitable for this.
If the bones are many, extract all of them and use all your effort, if something from the tendons is missing without it, there was no danger in cutting them, cut the tendons and meat if there is and complete the bones.
If you did not extract the bones from your time, carry the wound with what relieves it and leave it for days until the surrounding meat and tendons around that bone are relieved, keep the wound open so it does not become infected in the process of your work.
If you cover the incision with a piece of moist cloth soaked in pottery sand and olive oil, or a piece of moist cloth soaked in Egyptian mud or one of the soft marbles, then if the stitches come out and the bones become swollen, it will be easy to remove them.
If a single large bone like the thigh or shinbone and its adjacent parts became infected and only one side of it was affected, then that part should be amputated completely until the infection and swelling disappear, and then close the wound, because if the infected part is large and the infection has reached the bone, it cannot be cured by just cleaning it.
Cut it all the way to where the infection ends, and then treat it until it heals, and I tell you this is an example and a remedy for your case, this man was a case study in his thigh to help you with your treatment, and this man was a victim of that year.
About thirty years ago, he was a patient with pain in his thigh due to something that moved inside his body until it reached the leg and swelled greatly, and there was no external cause, and then time passed with the mistakes of doctors until the tumor opened.
Various materials and harmful substances were found in its treatment, leading to the formation of many holes in the leg, all of which allowed moisture from the body to enter. The surgeons dealt with it as a group for two years, but none of them had expertise in handicraft.
Until I saw her leg and the materials flowing from those holes, it was a great relief to see that the man had emptied his body and turned it white, so I inserted the probe into one of those holes and it reached the bone, then I examined all the holes.
I found that some of them flowed into all sides of the leg, so I separated and cut into one of those holes until I exposed some bones. I found them to be rotten, eaten, and decomposed until I pulled out the nail and spread what I had found.
I managed to remove the rotten bone and I think that there is no other decay in the bone besides what I cut out and spread. I thought it had healed, but I made him take the magic drugs for a longer period of time, so it did not heal. Then I exposed another part of the bone above the first one.
I found the decay connected to the bone and I spread what I had found as well. He did not heal, neither did it cure, so I made him undergo surgery again and expose another part of the bone. I continued cutting the bone piece by piece until I cut off about a hand's breadth.
He removed it with his instrument, then anesthetized it with drugs, and cured it quickly and completely, as this repetition was necessary for the case of the weakness of the patient and the low probability of recovery, and the fear of death from it because it had happened to him in all times from excessive dissection, which was then cured completely.
The bone regained its place in the flesh, improved its condition in the body, and reduced its strength in its affairs, and it was not affected by the danger of the joint, as if the bone had been broken in a part of the body.
It is recommended to publish it on this page as follows: take a tie and wrap it around the broken end of the bone and order whoever ties it to go over and make another tie of sandalwood thicker than the first one.
Then, tie it on the flesh under the bone and stretch its side to make the flesh go down and you will expose the flesh from the position you want to publish and do not hurt the flesh under the bone by placing a sheet or a board below it firmly.
Because if you do this, the cutting of the broken bone will not stop and it is recommended to publish it above the position of the decay as little as possible so that it does not appear in the curvature of the bone as decay without showing its appearance for the sight and you will have to republish it again.
In case of a rotten bone, it is not fresh but connected with each other. The rottenness can be found in all parts of it. Then, put the gauze from below and spread it from the first side where the rottenness is.
If the spread is not done from the other side, then spread it from the other side and make sure the spread is far away from the rottenness as much as possible. If the rottenness is in a bone, cut off the rotten bone itself and spread the bone where it connects from the other side.
If the rottenness is in two connected bones, there is no other remedy but amputation. If the rottenness is in the hand or foot, it is a difficult matter to treat and should be cut out as much as possible, cleaned, and disinfected on any condition that can be.
And whatever method you choose to remove it without causing your blood or nerve to be affected, know that there are many amputations and incisions for cutting these bones depending on the position of the bone, its arrangement, its thickness, its emptiness, its fullness, its smallness, its large size, and its firmness. Therefore, it is recommended that you use a tool for each kind of work.
Understand that the work itself may indicate the type of instrument required if you have a long apprenticeship and knowledge of this craft, as it is one of the crafts' honors and witnesses to various diseases. It may even resemble the instruments for each disease and I will show you in the latter part of this chapter several instruments.
Make it an example to be imitated and a measure to compare it with others, may God willing, a glimpse of the future.
Another glimpse of the future.
A small glimpse of the future.
A large glimpse of the future.
The head of this mere will be on the head of the spindle a cavity and inscribe it on the head of the inscription wheel, and it should correct the heads of the limbs if they are damaged or a wide large bone, a small glimpse of another small.
A wide glimpse of another small.
He makes his upper pole and his sleeve from iron and inlays it with a narrow groove, a detailed glimpse of the future in which there is a gentle curve.
Another gentle glimpse of the future.
In the name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate. Praise be to Allah, and may His blessings be upon our prophet Muhammad and his household. O reader, this is a brief excerpt from a surgery textbook written by Albucasis in the 10th century. It is a testament to the rich medical history of the Islamic Golden Age.
In the name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate. Praise be to Allah, and may His blessings be upon our prophet Muhammad and his household. O reader, this image resembles a small mountain, symbolizing the challenges and obstacles that surgeons must overcome in their practice.
In the name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate. Praise be to Allah, and may His blessings be upon our prophet Muhammad and his household. O reader, this is a small image, much like a small piece cut from the surgery textbook, representing a detailed analysis or procedure.
In the name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate. Praise be to Allah, and may His blessings be upon our prophet Muhammad and his household. O reader, this image depicts a surgeon's hand, treating fractures in various bones. The small image to the side represents a specific case of bone fracture repair.
In the name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate. Praise be to Allah, and may His blessings be upon our prophet Muhammad and his household. O reader, this image resembles a hammer made of Indian steel, symbolizing the precision and strength required in surgical tools. Similarly, all images and descriptions in the surgery textbook should be crafted with care and accuracy.
The seventh and eighth chapters.
In the division of the sides and the spreading of the bones.
The sides may become affected either from outside or from within, and if the malady is treated with medicines and the medicine does not cure it, I have seen the malady move towards the organ and nothing stops it.
It is best to cut off that part of the organ up to where the malady reaches, so as not to cause its death or from a great calamity that is greater than the loss of the organ, and an indication that the malady has overcome the organ until you think that the fire has burned it.
Or the side may become affected after the inflammation has spread to the organ and it approaches it, and then you should cut it off, and also if the cause of the inflammation is a swelling of some part of the body like the liver, or the pancreas, or the spleen, and so on.
If the inflammation or swelling is in the finger, cut off the finger and do not let the inflammation reach the hand, and if it has already reached the hand, cut it off from its root and do not let the inflammation reach the shoulder.
And if the inflammation or swelling is in the shoulder, cut off the shoulder at the joint of the same bone, for if the inflammation spreads to the arm, do not cut the arm because there is death and use other treatments according to your strength.
When operating on a man, if the offending bone is in the little finger, cut it at one of the pulleys; and if it is in the thigh, cut through the thigh at its root, and then ascend to the hip and cut the leg at the hip joint.
If the offending bone has reached the hip, there is no remedy but to amputate it and free the muscle below the desired cutting point and free another muscle above the cutting point.
The servant of one muscle extends it below and the servant of the other muscle extends it above, and separate the meat between the muscles with a narrow blade until all the meat is exposed, then cut or amputate, and it is best to leave a gap in all directions.
Do not let the suture point be in the wrong position, as it will cause excessive pain and swelling in the muscle. If bleeding occurs during your work, quickly cut the position or hold it with some of the cutting edges of the blood vessels and return to treatment until you are free.
Then, suture the cut bone to the correct muscle and treat it until it is released. I give you an example of a man with a leg that has a white spot with a burn-like appearance like fire.
This was the first that happened to his finger until he took the whole of it, and the man cut off his own finger when he saw the wound causing severe pain and burning, so he cut it at the joint.
Later, when time had passed, he saw the wound again in his small finger, and he intended to treat it with a remedy that he had on his hand after cleaning his body, but he did not apply the remedy and made the wound move to another finger.
Until he took the wound into his hand, I advised him to cut off his hand because of the pain and fear of death from that wound, as the man's strength was on the fall, so when he became calm, he went back to his country.
I was informed that he cut off his hand with his own hands and it was amputated, and I told this story to serve as a source of hope for what may happen to this disease and to serve as a precedent to act on it.
The eighth and eightieth chapter.
In the treatment of splints and how to inject them with drugs.
If a tumor occurs in some of the meaty bones and spreads for a certain period of time until it reaches the end of that period, it may stop growing or burst and everything that was in it disappears, leaving the position empty as if it were a container.
The skin that is like a crack has been healed and was not severe enough to affect bone, nerve, or tendon. Therefore, it deserves the name of cavity, not ulcer, as it has extended so much that it may affect something in these organs.
Therefore, it is called ulcer or cavity, and its treatment is to cut off that entire skin as it rotates, especially if it has healed and become like a crack and it becomes apparent that it does not adhere to the position due to corruption.
If the wound adheres to the skin and there was no corruption in it that amount, it was a piece of meat in the skin. It should be treated with injection, and if it is large, and the scab that comes from it is the smelly part, inject it with Egyptian medicine.
The ointment is oil, honey, and sugar, mixed together in a bowl and cooked on the fire until it becomes burnt and turns into a cake of honey, then you take what you need from it and moisten it with water and honey and apply the ointment to the wound and let it sit in it for two hours.
Then, you remove it with the ointment and do this for a few days until the cavity is cleaned and the scab is removed, and if you don't have this medicine, you can use the blood of the karam or the blood of the bull's tail, and let it sit on the wound.
Then he should wrap and wet it until he is sure that the cavity has been washed, and if there is no possibility of the Egyptian drug or the blood of the ox, he should wet it with water and honey mixed together with something from the almond which has been pounded.
Or he can wet it with honey and wine because the honey cleanses and washes, and the wine nourishes the cavity especially if there is wine in it, as it is astringent and dries up. If you do this several times and are sure that the cavity has gone bad, then close it with what comes out of the meat.
Like taking from the sweet almond and replacing it with a glue made of rose water and dry wine, or wetting it with some of the drugs and other aromatics that we have proven in the article about the aromatics, if the mouth of the cavity is narrow and does not fit the tube of the applicator.
Expand it slightly or put some of the Egyptian drug or the dragon's blood in the Moroccan honey until it expands, and also if the mouth is wide, collect the corners with the plaster and leave what enters into it without anything else.
Also, if the mouth that excretes dung is high, cut it in the lowest part of it so that the dung can go down from above to below because if the dung gets into the cavity's mouth, it prevents the meat from coming out in it.
If you cannot open the cavity towards its bottom as you wish, then fix the bone with a nail that is easy to pull out according to what suits you and does not cause any damage to the sharp part of the bone.
As for the magic drugs that are placed on the cavity from outside and their method of placement, it is to take one of the problematic magical remedies that you want and pour it over a cut in the bone until the cut is as large as the cavity itself. Then, using a thin sponge around the cavity, take a larger piece of sponge from the cavity and place it on another cut according to the size of the sponge, leaving the cut on the bone and not removing the large cut until after.
Several days, and as for the one on the cavity, it is the one that is removed every time to remove what gathered in the bone and to know what comes out of it from the wound, whether it is a lot or little, sharp or blunt, or not sharp.
And also, check the position of the cavity itself whether it causes pain to its owner in it or not, and if it does, then take care of you like this and see the material that comes out walking on the bone surface.
Understand that the wound has either been closed or is approaching closure, at which point it is dealt with and the incision is replaced. The area is then re-dressed. After a long period, the wound becomes less painful and does not cause discomfort from the closure.
Understand that the wound has become calm because some people delay the growth of the meat in their surgery, and among them is one who does this. If the wound exits the abdomen after many days, it is not closed, know that the abdomen was not closed.
Understand that the medicine should be dried and made moist when needed, like the marshmallow leaves if it increases, then increase the amount of quid. Know that the marshmallow leaves are used to treat it.
Understand that the remedy is to soak and mix it with old, moderate wine on top of it, then dry it with it and use it. This can be done if you do not have marshmallow leaves syrup, as long as you did not cook it until it becomes thick and used it or took from the marrow and patience and cinnamon and everyone sprinkles it on the wine and leaves it on the fire. After that, apply the incision on the flap and rub it on the cavity or let it drip with honey that has been cooked until it thickens and place the suture on the incision and rub it.
And it may be used in such cases the long catheter and the gold of Samangon and alum and quartz and glass are mixed with it or a group of them is used to squeeze it and wash it and dry it over the honey that has been described and used, and if the cavity remains unhealed after this treatment, know that there is corruption inside it.
And it has affected the bones or other hard muscles or tendons, and the treatment of the Nasiri should be applied according to what has been given.
The ninth and eighth section.
In the treatment of the gangrene and the infected toe and excessive finger cuts and divided fingertips.
Gangrene is a large piece of meat that grows under the infected finger or hand, and it may grow on other fingers, and if the matter of the gangrene is neglected and the treatment is not applied, it becomes putrid and foul-smelling.
Or it may rot the nail until it eats the matter of the gangrene and maybe it has rotted all of it and maybe it has reached the bone until it becomes wide and its color is like that of a bag, and if it is treated according to what we have mentioned in the section and the treatment does not cure it.
It is recommended that all the shoots that grow from the flax be cut off, and then the wound should be stitched afterwards. This is beneficial in many cases, and if the bone is also sound and the flax is also sound.
The opening of the flax was so large that it pierced the meat and caused it to become wet and soaked. It is recommended that a thin rag be placed under the opening of the flax that pierces the meat and raises it up, and then cuts off the meat.
Then, place the remaining meat on medicated powders until all of it is gone, and then treat it with marshmallow until it blisters. If the impurity has affected the bone, it is recommended that the bone be cut off and removed, as it will not blister unless the bone is impure.
If I see the eating and impurity striving in the finger, it is recommended that it be cut off at one of the soaks on what was mentioned, and then treated until it blisters. If the flax is affected by a blow or a wound and causes severe pain, it is recommended that the wound be first cauterized.
Then, cut the flax with a sharp knife that is curved from top to bottom and protects from reaching the meat that is under the flax. If you do this on the finger, it will cause severe pain and be a reason for excessive meat growth in that place. Then, treat the place with what soothes the wound.
In some people's hands, extra fingers are born that are like whole shanks and sometimes contain bones, sometimes phosphorus, and sometimes a plant grows in its initial separate part of some fingers.
Or it may grow in the initial part of the finger's phosphorus and does not move, and it grows at the joint of the finger, perhaps it was only a shank and cutting it is easy because it can be cut at its origin with a wide blade.
And the treatment of it growing at the origin of the joint is difficult to cut it, and as for it growing in the finger's phosphorus at one of its bones, it is better to first cut off its meat with gentle cuts and then spread the bone with one of those suitable maniulations.
Then it is treated until it is clean, and as for the dissection that reveals parts of fingers to each other, this is often done and it is what humans are born with and is seen when wounds heal or burn and so on, it is better to do this dissection.
Until the fingers return to their natural position, then place between them a piece or a cracked bone in olive oil so that it does not quickly stick to each other or make a thin lead sheet between them until the position is satisfactory.
The excerpt from the Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis translates to: "Similarly, the incision for some fingers of the hand is opened according to what suits the shape of the organ.
The phrase " " translates to "the 90th part" or "the 90th section" in English. However, without additional context, it's difficult to determine the exact meaning of this phrase in relation to the surgery textbook by Albucasis.
The phrase " " translates to "in the middle of the fingers" or "at the midpoint of the fingers" in English. This could refer to a specific point on the hand where a surgical procedure is performed.
The excerpt from the Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis translates to: "The fingers are thin, curved, and delicate parts of the body that are affected in more members of the body than any other part, especially in the ankles and knees, and even more so in the hips and buttocks. Therefore, it is recommended to first remove the dark color from the skin of the affected area several times with strong exfoliants.
The excerpt from the Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis translates to: "Then, remove the base of the nail, and as for treating it with iron, it will be done by striking it twice, one of which will cause blood to flow out and the other will cause the color to be washed away along with its residue. If it is struck, the leg will first swell due to hot water, indeed.
The excerpt from the Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis translates to: "Until the thick, dark blood is washed away, and then the swelling of the affected leg will subside from above to below its hip, and then the color will be washed away in one or two or three places wide.
The dark blood flows from your hand down the leg, upwards, and downwards until it exits the required amount or as much as you can bear of the force of the hemorrhage. Then, tie it off and command it to abstain from the food produced by the black day, and it will bleed again and purge.
The veins were filled and caused the hemorrhage to worsen, and if the leg has much hair, then it will enter the bath and heat its leg with hot water until it reddens and dries the blood or becomes a strong sweat.
If the leg was not heated in the bath before, then the skin will stretch along the blood vessel, either at the back of the knee or at the bottom of the foot, and then the skin will open with needles and the blood will appear from all sides until it is visible.
And when it appears, it is red and swollen, if it comes out of the skin, then it will look like a wound, and then put moisturizing ointment under it until it rises and comes out of the skin, seal it with a dry, thin ointment, and then stretch another one three fingers away from that.
He then peeled off the skin from the affected area until it was exposed, then lifted it up using his fingers as he had done before and tied it with a thread as he had done first, then made a cut or several cuts if he felt the need to do so.
Then he tied it and cut it at the end of the first incision, then pulled it out of the second incision, then pulled it up to the third incision and did this until it pulled out of all the higher incisions until all of them were cut off.
If you do not need to pull or cut, insert a strong needle with a pointy end, tie it, pull it, and insert under it your thumb until it comes out and keep it in place so that it does not break, if it breaks, it will be difficult for you to pull it off.
And he applies a remedy on the wound, if you pull it all off, place it in a position of surgery with a mixture of wine and oil or ointment and treat it until it is clean, if the wound is seeping with fluids, it has to be dressed with gauze.
And if it is not stable as we said, it is recommended to cut along its edges and all the places of seepage and wounds, then tie it with ribbons so that it dries completely, and keep in mind that cutting or scraping the juice makes it difficult for you to pull off, so preserve your effort.
Image of the spleen that is excised:...
Image of the empty-handed man:".
She does not have a grip like other spleens, and she is not sharp-edged lest she cut the flesh, for if she were soft, she would cut it with her softness. She has a certain advantage in being smooth.
The ninth and last chapter:".
In the city's urban slum:".
This meat is born in the thighs of hot countries like Hajj and Arab lands, and in the few fertile deserts, and it may be born in other parts of the body besides the thighs, and it is born from scabs that speak under the skin.
Just like in the living bodies and wounds, the scar and the wound that precedes it are a sign of the beginning of this meat, which begins in the thigh and then the wound spreads, and then the meat starts to come out from that place.
As if it were a plant or animal, if a part of it appears, it should be cut into small pieces of its own blood, which is contained in the thigh and left to solidify.
Every time something comes out of the body, it is due to the pores being blocked by lead and the substance being fixed in the flesh. If you cut it, the rest will also come out because if you cut it, it will become a wound with inflammation and scarring in that place, leaving a rind.
Therefore, it is advisable to handle and treat it little by little until everything comes out of it and nothing remains in the body, and sometimes it may come out of this kind in some people what is in length five fingers and ten.
And I heard that it came out from a man of twenty pieces, if you cut it while treating him with it, it will enter into the wound and close it tightly with the body until everything that is in it of matter is freed, and try to relieve the place with medicines for days.
Then treat it with the treatment of tumors, and this kind may have many varieties, especially if it appears in the male or female's leg or in the man himself, it causes many faces and comes out of each mouth a piece, as we mentioned in the division and with what follows.
The second part and the ninetieth section.
In the region below the uterus, there is a growth called the lamb's tail.
This disease is called lamb's tail in some of our countries for it often exposes itself to the lamb and is a small, single growth that develops between the skin and the meat and spreads throughout the body, both upwards and downwards.
It can be perceived by touching its member from one part to another until it pierces the skin at a certain position, then it exits and forms a wound with some wires as it is exposed to the dogs, lives, and pregnancy in the abdomen.
And it is expected that if she gives birth within the body and grows up to the head and reaches the eye, then it opens and exits and destroys the eye, and it is often exposed when treating it and removing it, only at the dogs' presence and perception.
It is best that you tie it tightly and cut it off, then remove it, for if it pierces the meat and does not find it, hold it over the fire until it burns, and the worst that can be expected is its damage to the eye as we have said.
I saw that it had become inflamed near the eye, with a firm swelling on the neck, which was good. Then I incised it and removed it, and it is recommended that the patient cleanse his body with easy laxatives for the sharp and rough foods that cause constipation and to preserve the foods that prevent dysentery.
The third chapter and ninth section.
In the incision of the disease known as leprosy.
This disease known as leprosy in our country is a wound that appears on some parts of the body and then spreads from one part to another, which I have seen on what I described to you.
I called a woman suffering from leprosy in some villages and removed her arm and blew gently on the tendon of her arm, and when I waited for an hour, I saw that wind blowing with the sound as if the dough was being kneaded, rising quickly to the end of it, as fast as the dough rises.
If the pain is transferred from that place to the end, the pain disappears from that place and settles in the opposite arm, then I waited an hour and pain appeared in all of his body until it appeared in the other shoulder, and she told me that her whole body was moving as she had seen.
I was surprised by the speed at which the disease spread from one part of the body to another, and I had never seen this kind of pain before, except for when I saw a group of people who were experiencing pain that was moving from one part of the body to another.
I could not have imagined this unless it was because the woman was from a desert area, with a thin body and open chest bones, so that this wind-like pain could be seen. It was necessary for it not to be seen in the well-being of the healthy and moist bodies with closed chest bones.
If you wish to treat it and see the patient in pain, then as we mentioned earlier, apply pressure above and below it with your hand until that wind-like pain is released and the area is cleared.
If you do not see it with your eye, treat it by applying cold to the body and removing the wind and releasing it like the nectar of the honeycomb and the sugaring of the sugar, and similar drugs.
The fourth section and the ninetieth.
In removing the sweat.
Sweat can differ based on its types and the locations where it appears on the body, and its difference based on its types is that some are large and small, some have a curved glass and others have a flat one, and some have three openings and four openings.
From the ones with a neck, and those with sides, and as per the members that are situated within them, they will be on two cuts, either the members are from major organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, spleen, and pancreas, and so on. When a bone broke into one of these members and symptoms of death appeared to me as I described them to you, it is best that you do not remove that bone from it, for death will accompany the one who does so in the worst of cases. When you did not see these symptoms of decay and the bone did not become warped within the member, and you removed it and treated the wound, and signs of brain death include when the bone pierces the skull and the eye socket causing severe headache, soreness, and dizziness.
When you did not see these symptoms of decay and the bone did not become warped within the member, and you removed it and treated the wound, and signs of brain death include when the bone pierces the skull and the eye socket causing severe headache, soreness, and dizziness. And there will be redness in the eyes and redness in the tongue, swelling, confusion, and the brain may be displaced once or twice, or speech may cease and the sound may leave its place, and moisture of white color similar to egg whites will come out, like cooked meat.
If these symptoms appear, stop the treatment and removal of the bone if it has not been removed, and signs of the heart include when it was near the left side of the breast and felt as if it had struck something solid instead of something empty.
Perhaps the shock resembled a heartbeat, spilling blood from the wound, followed by chills and cold sweats. I realized that death was imminent, and an indication of the shock was the exit of blood from the lung wound.
The veins below the throat swell, change the color of the saliva, and make a high-pitched breathing sound, indicating that the shock is near and the small neck veins are close to the throat with severe pain.
The shock spreads and moves all the liver members, and then the liver symptom follows with severe pain, blood exiting from the wound resembling liver color, and the shock-induced intestine symptom often exits from the wound not belonging to the food.
The patient's condition is apparent, and if the shock-induced abdomen symptom appears with something exiting from the wound or the throat or the chest, there is no cure or removal of the shock, indicating that the shock is a sign of fever and urine exit.
Something emerges from the body, and pain in the saliva worsens, realizing that it is fatal, while other members such as the face, eyes, cheeks, shoulders, back, thighs, and legs are affected to varying degrees.
When the glass did not intersect a vein or nerve and was not discolored, and I inform you of some of what I have seen of these glass fragments to testify to that on your treatment, for it was a glass that had been inserted into a man's eye socket in the nasal cavity.
And I removed it from the opposite side under the earlobe and it was clean, and I removed another glass fragment that had been inserted into his ear lobe under the lower eyelid and the glass had turned black but I did not find any part of it attached to the wood.
And there was a large glass fragment of the copper alloy that was not sharp and it was clean for the Jew and there was no bad event in his eye, and I removed another glass fragment from a Nestorian's eye and it was Arabic-shaped.
And it was the one with ears that I split between the wedding rings and it had pierced his wood and we were pleased with him until I removed it and healed him, and I removed another glass fragment from a man's abdomen and we estimated that he would die from it.
When the time of thirty days or so passed and nothing changed in his condition, I split on the glass and it healed and I removed it and it was clean and it did not expose him to any bad event, and I saw a man with a glass inserted into his back and I closed the wound on him.
When after seven years, the tumor was removed in its original place, I saw a woman who had it in her belly, the wound was healed and the tumor remained, it did not change in its state anything and she did not find any harm to any of her natural actions.
I saw another man who had a tumor in his face, the wound was healed and he did not find much pain, and there were many like this, and I removed tumors from a man who was among the leaders of the sultan, he had it in the middle of his nose and it had gone to the yonder side a little.
The tumor disappeared completely, I called for its treatment after it had been removed for three days and found the wound of the tumor narrow and wide, I examined it with a thin sponge and did not find anything, but there was a scar and pain under the left ear.
I hoped that the scar was from the tumor and covered the position with a bandage of strength and nourishment to make it heal and appear signs of the tumor, but nothing happened in the position that indicated that the tumor had reached the position.
I continued to cover it with the bandage for many days and nothing happened, but the wound got better until I found the tumor inside the nose one day and informed me about it, I applied the strong medicine on the wound for many days.
Until I opened and spread it, noticing the fine wire that was attached to the cloth, then I increased the opening of the wound with this strong medicine until the tip of the wire appeared to us through the incision and it remained there for about four months.
Then, as the wound expanded and allowed me to insert the catheter into it, I attracted and moved it, but it did not respond to exit. I continued to gently manipulate it with the instruments until I caught it on the following day of the clyster, as its appearance corresponded to what I had seen in the previous room.
And the physicians used to say that the nose of a patient could not be cauterized, so I cauterized it and closed the wound and healed the wound completely without causing any harm to anything that was inserted. And I will tell you how to remove some sweat to make it an example and evidence of what I did not mention.
Because these parts and their details are not described or surrounded by a book, but the craftsman measures the small with the large and what is present with what is absent and creates new work and new tools at strange nights.
When this operation is performed, the sphincter exits only from the parts where inflammation occurred, either by drawing away from the place that entered it, or from the opposite side, and it exits in the same way it entered.
If the sphincter is inflamed, it should be drawn away from the place where the inflammation occurred, and you should leave it for days until the fat around it becomes soft and easy to draw and exit. And if inflammation occurs in a bone, it should be drawn away from the place where the inflammation occurred, and you should leave it for days until the fat around it becomes soft and easy to draw and exit.
You should not leave it for days, but leave it for a few more days and draw and move it around the sphincter in all directions with a soft hook until it expands and draws and exits the sphincter. If you cannot leave it for a few more days, you can tie a string around the sphincter in all directions with a soft loop to expand it and draw and exit the sphincter.
If the drawing sphincter is in the skull and has been inflamed in one of the brain's foreskins, some of the symptoms mentioned to you have appeared, then hold back from drawing the sphincter and leave it for a few days until it recovers its function.
If the arrowhead is deeply embedded in the tissue, use the forceps around the arrowhead as described and treat the area until it is removed, and if the arrowhead has been buried in the body for some time. If you have forgotten to touch it, search for it with the spoon and if you can't reach it due to a small wound or after the arrowhead has been pulled out of the flesh and there is no bone, nerve, or fat.
Shave the area until the wound is wide enough for the arrowhead to be pulled out, and if there are two ears attached to it, remove the deeply embedded meat from all sides using any tool you can, and if you can't remove the meat from the split ears and tails, do so.
If you try to pull out the arrowhead, use the tip of your finger with a nail in all directions until it is removed, and if you can't reach it for a long time, it may be difficult to extract and remove it from your hand.
Spend days until the swelling subsides from the meat that was affected, then return it, for it is easier at this time. If blood obstructs your effort, use the treatment mentioned in that section, and preserve your effort from cutting or severing or ligating, and use the forceps.
With all your might, separate the embolus and make it smooth and stable as described for you, and it is recommended that you use the following when you draw the embolus: make the clot take the form it had when the embolus fell, for it is flat.
If you cannot do that, use what you can of the shapes, and as for the embolus that exits from the opposite side, it may be that something has burst out of it outside, or you may find the tip of the embolus at the top of the skin nearby and see it coming out.
Split it and make the split as wide as the clot can be in it, then draw it out because it is easier to exit, for if you hold your hand steady until the embolus affects the bone and expands for itself, then draw it out.
Or leave it for days until it is drawn out, for if the return of the embolus is in it, pull it out with it because the return has fallen and you intended to use the pull, then insert the curved instrument into its curve to enter its concavity in the saphenous vein and then pull it out with it.
In case the sphere is deformed, apply a tool to its deformation and the sphere will ease its exit. If the sphere is completely filled with meat, it is recommended to remove all the meat that has entered it, then treat it accordingly.
If the sphere is present in the chest, belly, thigh, or flank and is close to causing discomfort with a stretcher, you can cut it and preserve the edges of the flesh or nerve and remove it.
Then, make the incision if you need to use sutures, then treat it until it is removed, like the clavicle that attracts the spheres:
The edges of the wound should resemble the beak of a bird, as if it had caught the sphere or something else that was not left behind, and it can produce different sizes, large and small, depending on the size of the sphere, its thickness, the width of the incision, and its narrowness.
Image of the deformed mandible:
Image of the dismembered mandible:
This is the dismembered edge, like a ram's horn, which makes it easier to insert into the deformed sphere and push it:
The fifth section of the ninetieth part.
In the treatment of the ribs.
The ribs that are usually treated by dissection consist of thirty-two ribs in total. Sixteen of them are located in the head, which include the costal cartilages known as the Hussain's cartilage and the threads found in the upper parts of the lungs. The remaining twenty-six ribs are located in the chest, including the costal cartilages known as the Nazerin's cartilage.
The costal cartilage that is found in the middle of the face is known as the Gulf cartilage, and the costal cartilages found in the nostrils and the glottis are known as the Gulf cartilage and the Nasal cartilage. The costal cartilages found in the upper part of the neck are known as the Gulf cartilage and the Throat cartilage. These costal cartilages are also known as the Gulf cartilage and the Larynx cartilage.
The ribs that are dissected in the arm and hand are five in number, one of which is the Scapula, which is located on the side of the shoulder and is commonly known as the skull bone. The Scapula is the middle rib and is a combination of the Basculate and the Scapula cartilage. It is commonly known as the body bone.
The Basculate is located on the side of the chest and is also known as the shoulder blade. It is commonly known as the abdomen and the upper arm. It is the subject that appears on the zinc and is the one that connects to it and is visible above the collarbone with a clear appearance and the elbow.
This is the excerpt translated into English: "It is the race that lies between the thighs and the calf, with three varieties, one of which is under the knee of the evil side and the other is white and located at the hip of the good side, and the female race and its location at the ankle of the evil side.
Translation: "In the other thigh, there are three varieties like this, as for the races that follow the ears, they have the benefit of removing them from chronic earaches, deafness, and epilepsy, and how to remove them according to what was said.
Translation: "This is the method of tightening the neck of the scrotum and drawing it back into its place with a fine, rough cut, then it constricts the neck of the scrotum with a band until the races are visible behind the ears in the lower positions of the head, and you can feel them with your finger where you feel the beating of their hearts under your finger, here there is the practice of madad.
Translation: "Then take a smooth scraper, which is known as the knife, and insert it under the scrotum into the skin until it reaches the bone, then raise your hand with the scrotum and skin over it and cut the scrotum with the skin in spiral shapes, and the length of the cuts should be equal to the width of two fingers.
In the case of bleeding, you should take the required amount and then strengthen it with stimulants, allowing it to subside until it is completely stopped. In the first book, the cutting and sewing of the vessels is shown, and as for the two strings in the lungs, they are beneficial in preventing chronic cough, severe headaches, constant pain in the back, and frequent twitching of the eyes.
The method of stopping the bleeding that I mentioned earlier involves raising the patient's head until the veins become visible under their finger, and then they learn to raise the skin from the base of the vein up to the tip of their finger with their thumb.
The vasoconstrictor pulls the pus up from below and raises the blood to the top, and as needed, it sends out the required amount of blood, then closes the wound with your thumb and places it on the skin for an hour.
Then, place a bandage and gauze on top, compress it firmly but not too tightly, and leave it until it is completely dry, as described in the first book, and the benefit of stopping the flow of blood from the wound is that it prevents chronic headaches such as migraines, sinusitis, and the redness of the eyes.
Method of relieving the strain on what was described to you as the tightened neck of the animal by a noose until the color appears, then take the instrument called the noose, here is its appearance:
She places the noose-like object in the neck of the noose and beats it from above with something similar, allowing blood to flow on the gauge you want, then tightens the strangled neck and draws it until it is free.
And it may open wide, but it is not recommended that the grip be sharp like other grips, rather it should be slightly rounded and should widen to avoid cutting the bone as it may break in it if it is thin.
And the two hairs in the corners of the eyes, their benefit is to relieve the eye from rubbing, redness, and dryness, and diseases of the face, and as for how to remove them, it is to tighten the strangled neck with a noose, then take them while standing on the head and make the removal slight by using a narrow, wide grip.
For the position has no meat in it, as if the grip were sharp-edged, it may break, then send your need for blood and place a cloth on them and tighten them for one night, and as for relieving the swelling of the nose, it is beneficial from severe fever.
Severe headache and one of the facial diseases such as the scarlet fever that affects the nasal cavity, especially if it is chronic, and how to relieve it by raising the head and then holding the patient's nose with your left hand and taking a thin, long thread.
And it is rubbed in the middle of the neck itself between the nostril and the nasal septum because the blood does not appear here, as the blood becomes visible at this time, and it is recommended that you gently touch your hand with the thread and pull your need from the blood then tie it at night because it will come out quickly.
And as for the earwax, it is beneficial to relieve it by narrowing the throat and starting the caries and the black plague diseases that appear on the surface of the skin such as the black soot, the warts, the dull pimples, and the ears, and how to relieve it is for the patient to raise his head with the earwax under it in a ribbon and the maker stands on the head of the patient.
The patient is placed on a chair, then the blood is cleared to a long distance for a wide relief, and a little blood is drawn or according to what is needed of it, then the same process is repeated with the other wax, and the ribbon is closed.
The darkness of the wound is removed and it is left until the next day when it is cured, and as for the wounds of the sharp points, they are beneficial in saving them after saving the knees because they benefit the shoulders in the mouth and preventing the deformity of the chest and the rough edges of the shoulders and the cracking of the hands and the rough edges of the hands.
The wounds in the nose and around it, and how to save them is to place the knife in front of you and raise your neck with a hood, then change the hand and look at the two wounds that you see on the right side of the wound and the left on the left side, and you will see from their whiteness.
And that is also that the two wounds are black and have long teeth, so cut them in a slanted way, as you do not know what it is, and cut the largest of them and their roots, and also make in the two wounds in the lower part of the nose.
And as for the wounds under the chin, they are beneficial in saving them after saving the knees for the swelling of the gums and diseases of the mouth, and how to save them is to place the knife between your hands with the sun shoe and raise your chin and look under the chin from one side of the wound white and from the other side of the wound white and their color to white.
Remove them and preserve them, do not touch their cut ends, for beneath them are blood vessels that may cause bleeding from those vessels, and the three incisions mentioned in the section are usually made by removing them on one side.
Or it may be a wide incision like a razor's, or a narrow one like a sewing needle's, and if it is a narrow one, it is called the 'nashl' (a type of suture): this is the picture of the wide incision (razor's):
It shall be wide as you see to make an opening for the dilated, distended, prominent, and bloody arteries that contain thick blood like dregs, and this is the picture of the narrow incision (sewing needle's):
This incision is smaller and has more sloping sides, suitable for cutting the thin-blooded, clear arteries that contain thin blood, and this is the picture of the narrow incision (nashl):
This 'nashl' incision, used for cutting and having various types of wounds and openings based on the size and narrowness of the arteries, is well-known among artisans.
And the 'basal' incision, one of these three arteries, is beneficial to cut because it attracts blood from the vein that is below the wound and abdomen, and it is preferred for cutting that it warns the fitter and is on the neck of it, for if there is a vessel under it, it may mistake and cut that vessel in the incision.
In case of blood loss, it is advisable that the wound should not be left open but should be closed by stitching. If no signs of inflammation appear, it is recommended to avoid it and move towards another option or request some of its parts.
If the wrist bone is exposed, it is clear and should be closed by stitching as we have said. If you want to close it before the arm is tightened, it is recommended to mark the position until you recognize the position of the spasm, then learn on it with the thread.
Then tie the arm and close the wound with a stitch that is pulled out in a curved shape using the thread as we have said, and make sure that the knot is not in the area of the suture. If you see in the tightened tendon at the position where you taught to sew with the thread, that knot is the tightening of the suture, avoid it.
If I see the blood coming out of the wound oozing like the oozing of a cut, and the blood was thin and red, I knew that it was from the suture. Then I quickly placed my finger on it for a long time, then removed my finger because the blood flowed much less than when it was cut. The arm was tightened.
And let him be warned against neglecting it, so that he does not move his neck for days until he is free, for if the blood does not cease and his strength is not exhausted, and he does not receive medicine in time, the string may be torn. If it appears, then the two ends will shrink and the blood will stop.
Or take a piece of wet cloth, tear it into two halves, and place one half on the skin, moistened with ghee and wrapped in a cloth, until another day. If the blood stops or, if not, treat it as mentioned in the description of the cutting of the cords to stop the bleeding, and cutting his blood is not difficult in any case.
If the wound is small and the tendon is tight in the arm, inform him, and as for the dried ghee, it helps to attract the blood from the top of the head to the bottom of the body, as we said, it is a mixture of a part of the basil plant and a part of the cypress plant.
And it is recommended for the suture to be on his neck, as there is a nerve underneath, so that the knot of the suture increases and the nerve is affected, causing pain that makes it difficult to see, and this nerve is often visible in the sense of sight.
In some people, the vein is hidden and delicate, not clear where it lies. It is advisable to make a cut near it with a knife and avoid touching the nerve. For if the race is between two nerves, the race of the vein is long, and as for the vein of the temple, it is beneficial to protect it because it attracts blood from the head.
And what is the benefit of eye diseases and it is especially good if you cut it in this vein;lt;you cut it;gt; in the ointment of zayton or in the wide ointment of Rihane for it closes all the veins because it is not under a nerve or a cord.
But it is better for you when cutting to avoid the ointment of the head of the nerve only and ask for a light position, and it will not harm if it is not struck by the first blow but is struck again on it several times, but it may cause swelling in some people if it is not struck by the first blow.
But it does not harm the tumor at all, and as for how to cut and its symptoms and what should be done in its treatment, the first thing that should be learned is that cutting can only be used for preserving health.
In case of disease and that it is used for maintaining health and its stability and avoiding the occurrence of diseases, it should be located in one of the three lobes, the highest being the cerebrum and the cerebellum, and the basal ganglia, and it should be located in the first quarter of spring if signs of overflow appear.
The incision should be made on Sunday or Tuesday after the day has passed for three hours, and as for the incision used for diseases, it has no fixed time but rather when the need and necessity for it arises from night or day.
In every hour and in every time, and it is not recommended that the children be operated on until they reach fourteen years of age, and neither is it recommended that the elderly who have surpassed sixty years be operated on, for whatever reason may arise.
It is recommended that the gallbladder be emptied before the incision by injecting a solution of lye if it is large and bound, so as not to attract to the lobes during the incision due to the formation of foam that harms the main organs, and the gallbladder, saccharomyces, and thyme do not undergo the incision until that is eliminated from them.
He also warns of further harm by inflammation, diarrhea, back pain, excessive consumption, fatigue, sports, sleep deprivation, and all other physical or mental weaknesses before that, and then look at the fitting of the screws if the blood is thick.
Through food, drinks, and medications if possible, then enter the bath if it does not prevent or slows down some sports to make the blood thick and make inflammation in the morning as we said and make his heart free from all mental fatigues of the previous day.
Like anger, grief, fear, and all physical ailments such as fatigue, excessive sweating, and sleep deprivation, and prepare a list of things that people have used in their habits with the use of things like honey, cool breezes, and relaxation, as each person can do according to their ability.
Then the patient sits on a higher stool than the one the patient with the fever sits on, then he takes his arm out and presses his elbow with his hand twice or three times, then stretches the tendon with pressure and presses it twice or three times, so that the pressure is gentle.
When force is not moderate, either due to excessive force causing a stop in blood flow, or to relaxation preventing it, then after the force, the surgeon should gently move all his hands with their respective fingers.
Until the muscles spasm and are felt by touch, then clean the oily finger with alcohol especially, then place the little finger of the right hand on the same spot under the position he wants to hit as little as possible to avoid causing a spasm. Because the muscles that spasm and cause a spasm when hit are not filled with air, when you place your finger on them they decrease and deceive the spasm and do not open the muscle fibers, and if they open them, it is only a slight opening.
Therefore, it is recommended that the finger remains stable and calm in these matters, then the surgeon should remove it because if the muscle fibers are opened from the root they will reopen again under that position or above it if the position does not improve.
If the scar or wound is left to heal for one or two days and there is no swelling of the tendon, it may cause a hot wound that does not enter the bath, then the spasm returns if you want, because the surgeon's finger penetrated and the opening was small and the blood flowed thinly.
I feared that too much blood might escape, so the surgeon should slightly open the wound in the same spot where the pin was removed, and then stitch it with a needle before the area has healed, for many people may heal differently at a small incision.
If I see that it has healed, do not insist on it, for it does not appoint anything to you and there is nothing to place on it except a little oil from olive oil, as it facilitates the flow of blood and is better in this case than the oil itself and other oils, and also.
Use olive oil in all your wounds when the flow of blood is difficult, and if one of them is placed on the spot, the blood may run and drip if it is thick.
If there is a wound and a large abscess, it happens often, especially for those who have not been sutured before or if the wound was small, then apply a poultice of oak bark in water and salt, a little mixed, and leave it for an hour, as it will drain.
It is preferred to do this after all the blood has been completely drained from the wound itself or from another wound, as there may be something yellowish or greenish in the wound that does not cause any harm, so if you prefer, hold something on it.
If you find the base of the thumb painful when pressing on it, that is a sign of sprain. Avoid putting any weight on it until it heals.
It is possible that blood has clotted in it, but tie it tightly to adjust the position and then treat it with other remedies until it is clean, and it is recommended that each person take out as much blood as possible from their arm based on their strength and the color that predominates on the blood.
If the blood is black, let it come out until it turns red, and if it is thick, send it until it goes away, and it is recommended for those who are full and need to remove a lot of blood to do so in one go.
The incision should be wide and the cutter narrow, especially for weak people, and it is recommended to remove it in several sessions and make the pin narrow, and the best tool for cutting flesh is a sharp, square blade without teeth.
This method of incision is good for stopping bleeding and cutting nerves, and it is recommended to lubricate the area with bread soaked in rum or sugar water before the incision.
When the wound is bleeding three times or four, and the patient is depressed, let him drink before the operation a loaf of bread soaked in myrble wine or in sweet mulsum with anise or in good ale.
If the patient is sweating much during the operation and the cause of this sweating is the loss of a lot of blood, it is best that he drinks lamb's broth and sweet mulsum wine and uses turmeric ointment and rubs his chest with it and uses all the other things mentioned in the division for sweating.
If the patient is experiencing a lot of discharge and wants to free his arm and remove his blood, it is best for someone who has undergone a large and weak surgery to remove a little bit of blood little by little in successive days.
If the patient is experiencing a lot of discharge and wants to free his arm and remove his blood, and his body is strong, he should do it after seven hours or eight days from his first surgery, and if the patient wants to draw the blood away from the affected side, it is best for him to go to see him on the second or third day.
If the patient has a lot of blood in his body that has become hot and increased, it is best for him to remove it all at once and expand the wound so that the wound becomes exposed after all the conditions of the surgery are met. Place your hand on the pulse of the blood when it pulsates in the neck to prevent sudden death, as this is often overlooked due to ignorance of the fascia and sometimes results in second-hand amputation of the arm.
The throat has closed and made it difficult to extract the blood, either by pressing with great force or by twisting with strength. In that case, it is a very serious matter, either to leave it until it is completely lost or to remove it with a cork from the blooded mouth.
Or carry something salty on it that has dissolved in the water, or carry something acidic or pungent and it clings to it in a soft grip until the blood is extracted. If the throat has swollen, leave it.
Do not touch it until the tumor has settled, as the necessity to remove the blood second time is great and either to lose it above that position or to lose it in the other arm or in the other neck.
And if the arm's tendon is to be cut off as an alternative to the rotten and stinking ones, because there are none or they are hidden, as it is a mixture of them, and the way to cut it is to put it in hot water until it turns red and the blood appears clearly, then raise it over it with a bandage slightly raised but not too much.
Then the skin is incised slightly, without length or breadth, and the cut should be wide and serve as a flap above the wrist joint slightly, if blood escape is difficult, the hand is placed in the basin of hot water and allowed to bleed into the water.
Until your need is met, if you are in summer months, you may avoid re-placing the hand in hot water and more so that blood flows in hot water during winter, and this skin is preserved from all skins. Because there is no harmful skin and nerve under it, and as for separating the thumb from the hand, it is beneficial for the liver and how to separate it by tying the hand with a cord or your hand after it enters the hot water until the skin swells.
Because there is no harmful skin and nerve under it, and as for separating the thumb from the hand, it is beneficial for the liver and how to separate it by tying the hand with a cord or your hand after it enters the hot water until the skin swells. And it becomes clear to the hand greatly, then incise it on a slight cut and if it is hurt, nothing happens to it, and do not let your hand touch the wet cloth because under it there is a nerve of the fingers and its position is away from meat, then place the hand in hot water again.
And let it bleed in it if you did not place it in hot water, the cold blood will be frozen in the skin's mouth and stopped from flowing, if you extract from the blood what is needed, put some oil and salt on the skin quickly to prevent it from freezing quickly.
Also, it is advisable to do this for every narrow piece, and as for the benefit, it saves the left hand from injury, which is beneficial for the treatment of fractures and also do it in the same way as you did in the second case, whether. And the benefit of the ribs is for the diseases that are below the body such as fractures of the ribs.
And note the swelling and diseases of the kidneys, bladder, and chronic inflammation of the knees and ankles, and how to save it so that the man's leg enters hot water and carries the cloth until the pulses are heard, then rise over the thigh bone with the pulse and the inflammation in its place at the ankle visible towards the emission.
And the man's face will become swollen, so save it in the widest piece of it or at the ankle of it when he is with his community, for it is best and most pleasing, and if you save it on the man's face, it will preserve the nerves that are below him on his face.
And make the saving of him by twisting as if you want to cut off his foot, for if it is difficult to remove the blood, let his leg be in hot water and leave the blood to flow until it is empty, for if he mistakes the pulse in the saving, it is a mistake in the first attempt.
It should be noted that the position is safe, not to fear it from the gangrene, as long as it is preserved from the nerve, just as we said and also with the fingers of another man, whether a male or female. As for the place of the woman's blood, it is as we said, at the edge of the wild side.
The benefit of its removal is to alleviate the pain of inflammation if it is before the hot blood and how it is removed is to enter the bath and quickly and firmly lift the foot from the base of the swelling up to the thigh with four fingers using a thin, long glove, and it will only be visible in this way.
If it appears, remove it on any case you have, whether it is a fracture and it is the best, or if you cut it or make a hole in it, and its position is safe, and it is known to more people than others, and if you cannot find it.
The painful part has not been shown, so remove a part of it and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot towards the knuckles and the hump and preserves the nerves and sends the amount of blood you want.
Then, treat the swelling by placing a cloth on the place of the cut and lift the position quickly, as it will easily be removed.
Chapter 67.
In the incision and its application.
The incision can be made from wood, ivory, glass, or glass, and the incision can be on one side, the cut and bleeding, and the other side, without restriction.
This incision, without restriction, is on both sides.
And the incisions of the barbers, they are both sides of the eyelid, and the incisions of the dentist, it is under the lower jaw of the mouth, and the incisions of the thighs, and the incisions of the thumbs on the inability of the sin, and the incisions of the fingers, and the incisions of the knees.
And the incision only attracts blood from the moist and tender veins in the meat, and for this reason it does not lose strength, cutting off the limb and it is not recommended to use the incision with fire or without fire in any disease that is full until the body is completely emptied.
The use of the gauze was necessitated by the disease or usually we used it at any time in the beginning, middle, and end of the month and in any other time as needed.
Then, among those who had more blood in their heads, they found a heavy weight and swelling, some of them found fullness and redness in their faces, necks, and shoulders, some of them found wrinkles in their faces and necks, and dark spots in their eyes, and some of them found pimples in their eyes, and some of them had a swollen face.
Among them, some laughed the most and some found the taste of blood in their mouths, swallowed it, and bleeding occurred, some slept the most and some saw in their sleep blood, wounds, and amputations, and similar things, when we saw something like that.
Especially, when it is in the middle of the month, we were required to use gauze after two or three hours of daylight, and the benefit of using gauze on the nose is that it helps to relieve the weight in the head and water that flows to the eyes.
However, it should be done after cleansing the body and this gauze may replace the coldness of the head and warn not to use it if he has a cold brain or has a fever, as it can cause great harm.
Therefore, it is not advisable for the elderly or those in charge of them to use cold diseases, and those who forget about them due to their birth on them.
Therefore, it is recommended that the shave-haired should lower their hand slightly with the razor, fearing the birth of al-nasi'a, and as for the shaving of the eyebrow, it is an alternative to saving the mustache and saving the eyebrows.
Therefore, it benefits from respiration and constriction of the chest and activation of the breathing device and vomiting and fullness, and it is recommended that the eyebrow shaving be slightly raised because it points downwards and causes weakness in the heart and stomach.
And as for the eyebrow shaving, it benefits from the sudden pain in the head, neck, chest, abdomen, and throat, and it is an alternative to saving the eyebrows, and it is recommended that the shave-haired should not lower their hand deeply lest they cut a vein in case of bleeding.
And as for the shave-haired under the chin, it benefits from the throat and the lowering of the jaw and similar diseases in the mouth and may cause swelling and heat from fullness.
Regarding the wound of the abdominal wall, it benefits what benefits the three large pulsating veins: the thigh, the chest, and the calf, because it attracts blood from all those large pulsating veins found in meat and attracts those large pulsating veins from other veins that are thicker until the attraction reaches the three small pulsating veins.
It is advisable to order the wound not to be affected by the condition because the location is under the meat and beneath it are nerves and blood vessels, and the single one that covers the thighs benefits from beside the seat and the heels of the feet.
It is advisable for the wound to have a large and stiff covering because the location requires a strong support, and perhaps the glass covering of the thigh would not meet the requirement, and the covering of the thighs reduces the fill by a clear amount.
Because it attracts blood from all the body and benefits the chronic pains in the kidneys, bladder, and uterus, dries the sweat, benefits the boils and abscesses, and supports the wounds of the spafnins and the thighs, except that it wears down the body greatly and causes swelling in many people, and the covering of the thighs has a benefit similar to that of the covering of the thighs.
The method of placing the splint involves first emptying the splint box and inserting a gentle one, not too long, then quickly placing and removing the splint to accept the forceps evenly at each level until the position turns red and opens.
When the position turns red and opens, it indicates that the blood is present, and then you should use one only to prevent it from widening.
The splint is ordered to widen the forceps, slightly deepen the hole, and adjust the splint in a gentle direction of movement. If there is too much blood, it should be inserted twice, once to open the way for the blood to flow and the second time to remove the excess blood.
If the blood is very thick, repeat the splint three times to reach the goal, and in general, if we want to remove a small amount of blood, one splint is enough, but if we estimate that the blood is much, then we need more splints.
It is best to use a deep and gentle splint, with a limited depth in the skin, as advised by the apothecary when placing the splint, and the water, and what warns the surgeon. If the skin is thick, hard, and narrow with a wide opening.
In the event that you are mending the areas of the screws, it is recommended to use an open, sieved, and analyzed dough such as olive oil, oven grease, sugar almond oil, or honey from the flowers.
And if it is winter, such as resin, turpentine, ginger oil, or clove oil, and the advantage is strong and cold, then the grease should be mingler's oil, nutmeg oil, benzoin oil, or camphor oil, and so on.
If the mason is wide, then the grease should not be used for fixing the screws, and these should be washed their screws after fixing with water of rose, cold water, or water of bear's paw, or water of ginger, or water of the male, or water of the donkey, and so on. And if his blood is much moisture.
The screws should be washed with soap or water of vinegar and lemon, and if his desire is strong, then the screws should be washed with old wine, mingler's oil, ginger oil, or clove oil, and so on. And it is recommended to be careful when fixing in the bath and after the bath.
Upon exiting the bath, it is recommended to wait for an hour or two before going to sleep. It is not advisable for anyone to sleep immediately after the ablution. The mukahi and the muffasa should perform their ablution before and after the ablution.
It is necessary to look first, as the mukahi or the muffasa is usually of no value and has a low fever and inflammation. It is recommended that he takes the remedies such as rhaman, hindibake, khal, khus, siknjaben, jalabi, and others, and his diet should be fraryj, liver of the doe, saqbeja, and harismi, and so on.
And if his mood is cold, it is recommended that he drinks honey or ginger drink or the bzour siknjaben and consumes middle-strength aromatic tea between old and new, and makes less food and makes his food fraryj, khus, qanbar, and frawh al-hamam isskabeja, and it is recommended that the drink be more than the food on the day of ablution and washing.
And it is recommended that some people drink some of the rehydration fluid or the drug of musk or shileth before ablution and before washing, or after to strengthen the main organs and clear the blood, and it is not advisable for the drunkards to drink it.
These are the clamps without conditions, they are the ones placed on the liver and gallbladder, kidneys, abdomen, uterus, and the place of the kidneys for the purpose of drawing blood from one organ to another, as these organs do not require a condition, but rather it is intended to attract blood from one part of the body to another.
When we place the clamp on the kidneys in the operation of ligation or when we use it to draw blood cold air may pass through the organ, as it is placed on the abdomen and uterus, it harms the organ and heats it up, and it goes away for analysis of this air.
And if it is placed on the kidney, either in a ligation or when it is used to draw cold air, it may open the clamp or push the plug from its place, and it also does this when it is placed on the liver and gallbladder when cold air passes through them, these clamps can be used empty only.
And it can be used in cauterization and drying of the gums, as it fills the clamp with hot water or water that has been cooked with some herbs suitable for this purpose.
Then it is placed on the place, held, and tightened and repeated as necessary, and this is the image of the clamp used in cauterization:
The capacity of its pharynx should be two openings, as we have depicted, with a depth of about a quarter of a grain, and there should be a small projection on one side, approximately the size of the handle of the forceps, made from Chinese brass or black brass.
A layered, woven dressing should be used to avoid irritating the organ when placed on it, and there should be a copper or iron hook in the middle where the thread is heated, and this bandage can be made large or small according to the disease.
If we use this bandage, note that the bandages for boys and girls are not the same as those for adults, and the way to heat this bandage is to touch it with hot sand or a small piece of thread and place it in the middle of the tied knot of the bandage.
The heat of the fire should rise from the bottom of the bandage upwards, so as not to burn the patient's body, then it is placed on the organ and the finger on the hook until we hold the bandage and do not pull out the finger.
The water should come out from the hook and the bandage evaporates on the surface, then the thread is placed on the fire again if it got wet, and the bandage used in the case of the disease of the bladder does not have a tied knot or a hook.
This is how you use it: fill it with water and place it on the body part only, this is its appearance:".
This suture was best when it was large enough to hold a lot of water.
The seventh and ninth chapters.
In the comment to the comment.
The comment says: This suture is only used in more cases for body parts where it cannot be placed due to their small size such as wounds and nostrils, and also when the body part is fatty like the finger and nose.
The method of using it is to take the salty water from the wounds and leave it in the salty water for a day and night until it swells and nothing remains inside it. Then the body is removed either by cutting or by suturing, and the affected part is cleaned.
Until it turns red, then place it on the affected part if it falls off, and if the position can be held by the suture, that is best, otherwise clean the position with soap and water, then dry it and cool it, and if bleeding occurred after falling off, close the wound with a piece of cold water.
The patient must lie on his back, with the affected part elevated until the blood flow ceases or is replaced by the other half of the cut edges.
The wound should be left to heal in its place until the blood flow stops, and it is preferable that the wound be re-closed if possible. If the wound cannot be re-closed, then the area should be cleaned with boiled water.
Or, a scalpel can be used to clean the area until something comes out of the blood, and then it should be placed on the ground if something is felt from the blood. If you want it to stay in place, you can wait for a while, or add some salt or vinegar, and it will fall on the ground.
The third chapter.
In algebra.
This chapter also deals with what is needed in the manufacture of medicine, which is algebra for breaking and unraveling bones.
Inform the doctors and the laypeople that this chapter may be called the ignorant among the physicians and the people who have not read any books on this subject or even read a single letter from it.
This is why this science of medicine in our country is weak, and I have not seen any good example of it. Indeed, I benefited from it what I benefited for the length of my reading of the early books and I strove to understand them until I extracted the knowledge from them, then I needed practice and experience throughout my life.
And I have drawn for you in this chapter all the knowledge that surrounds my knowledge. And I continued my practice after bringing it close to you and completing it from the field of sculpture, condensing it to its essence, clarifying it in its expression, and presenting to you many images of the machines used in it.
As for increasing the explanation as you did in the advanced chapters, there is no power except by the Great and Merciful God.
The first part.
In this part, there are sentences and paragraphs of the order of breaking bones and it is necessary to present them before we start with the mention of the single members that are amputated and removed, it is recommended to mention in the introduction of this part sentences and paragraphs of the saying. First, you must understand and stand on the truth that you and those who were eager to learn this noble craft are not.
And I say that when one of the bones is broken, amputated, or cut off, it is recommended to quickly remove it or heal it, or both. In case strength is not the obstacle, and nothing unusual happened to him, whether he was a boy or a man of authority, and the time was severe, very cold, then...
Then, he should limit his diet to cold foods and bird meat, avoid alcohol and fatty meats, and not fill his stomach with food until the tumor is healed and no adverse effects are expected on the material.
Then, the lame should return to his original treatment plan, and if he was forced to eat broken bones, it would be best for him to eat food that contains a lot of strong, thick meat like chicken, rice, goat heads, and donkey skulls, as well as their hooves. And if he eats eggs, fish, strong alcohol, and similar drinks, this treatment will speed up bone healing and know that broken bones in men and elders cannot connect or harmonize with their original nature ever.
To strengthen his bones and their hardness, and to know that they can connect and harmonize with the original nature of young children's bones, but the nature grows on the broken bone from all sides, it becomes a hard and rough surface that presses and strengthens it until some parts need help from others.
Some are connected to each other until they reach maximum strength and stability, just like the first one, until nothing obstructs its action.
Therefore, the patient's food should contain substances that are strong, nutritious, and nourishing, as we have mentioned, and be aware that the fracture can differ according to the difference in the members because a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull or a fracture of the chest bone.
Also, all other members differ from each other, and we will mention each type of fracture in its own detailed section without it being the same as another type of bone fracture.
Therefore, a fracture may be green without having bones in it, and it may be a long bone fracture with broken ends and unbroken ends, and it may be a cut and gap in the skin and it may be a gentle movement.
And for each type of fracture, there is a specific treatment method to be mentioned in its own place, and what is recognized as a bone fracture is its appearance, its appearance, its appearance when touched with your hand, and its swelling.
When there is no swelling, pain, or discomfort in the position, and no instability in the bone of the limb, and the physician does not find much inflammation, there is no fracture, but it can be a sprain or a slight strain here. It is not advisable to move it with unnecessary movement and agitation.
If he carries medications that are mentioned after the position is fixed, and it becomes firm and gentle, know that the bone will not fracture or break if there are no symptoms except that it has become a complete part of itself.
It is recommended that you start fixing and adjusting it from the beginning so that it does not happen to him a hot fracture, if he has a hot fracture, leave him for days until the hot fracture subsides and then fix it with whatever you can do with gentleness and humility.
Know that fixing and adjusting his joint is easier than the bone that has fractured, and then he will follow what is mentioned, if the bone has fractured, then it is necessary to amputate the limb from both sides, hand or foot.
Either with your hand if the limb is small, or with a splint and with the hand and the splint, and place the limb in the position of the bone as it is naturally shaped until the bone that has fractured extends, then you will fix the edges in their places with whatever you can do with gentleness and humility.
Make every effort to avoid causing pain or injury with your hands, and do not force any bone to be placed in another's position. At that time, it is recommended to touch and examine them with your hand. I have seen something contrary to this, I corrected it and adapted it according to my ability.
Beware of severe anger and excessive criticism, as many foolish people do this often, causing harm to the body, such as causing a bone to be broken or dislocated. I have seen this happening repeatedly due to their actions.
Then, after adjusting and strengthening, I made the joint still and guided it not to move during sleep, waking, change, agitation, and when the limb is raised, and at all movements, keeping it as stable and secure as possible, ensuring that the joint is supported by a painless position.
This is because when I feel that the joint of the limb is painful or injured, I do not transfer it to a different position that does not cause pain, and I ensure that the new position is stable and even.
To prevent inflammation in the joint if it is forced, and as for how to heal a broken bone, I have described it earlier. Be aware that broken bones differ in size, shape, and structure. They can be small like the elbow, finger, and toe, and so on.
It is recommended that the incisions and cuts be deep and long, similar to the thumb and forearm, for the wide tendon to support the large muscle and strengthen it evenly on both sides, without causing any defect.
Then, after you have finished the adjustment, start painting with the appropriate paint. In a line above the fracture, then start to tie the tendon at the same position of the fracture three times or four according to what the bone deserves, and slightly bend your hand with the tendon, then go up to the upper side of the fracture position.
Tie less than your hand's strength, then slightly move away from the fracture position and let your hand relax a little until you get something good from the right position, then take another lace and tie it on the fracture position as well.
Tie and move the lace to the lower side of the fracture, making sure to do it in the right strength and bending of the lace as we mentioned in the first upper lace, then place something between the laces of the line or cut that balances the fracture.
In case of swelling, do not add anything else, then smooth over with another group of bones, then straighten the jagged edges of the bone from your hourglass. If there is no breath or heat in the member.
If there is breath or heat in the member, hold it with what is inside the tumor and let it go by breathing, then leave it for days, then straighten the edges of the bone when that, either the edges of the sprigs of the pine trees are evenly cut by wisdom, or the edges of the bones are from the pine needles.
The ones made from pine nuts, pine needles, or twigs, or similar, and for each bone to be in this shape and form.
Except that the bone placed on the fracture should be thicker and slightly less than the others, and as for the length of the bone, it is made according to what is appropriate for the broken member, depending on its size and thickness, the shape of the bone:
Then smooth over the edges with another group of bones according to your first sharpness, then tie from above with fine threads according to what we mentioned about sharpness, which is that your sharpness should be on the position of the fracture. Whenever a fracture occurred, the force was less.
It is preferred that the threads be moderate in tension and flexibility, especially if they are wet, as seen with the jawbones where they make their teeth from wet clay, which is a great mistake.
It is because the force is outside the balance and the flexible threads do not suit as you cannot reach the force with them, and it should not be less than a finger's breadth between the fingers.
If the fracture is with a depression and a crack in the skin, we should mention it separately.
Not all broken bones should be treated with the fingers on the first day, as the bone may be too large and it is not recommended to apply pressure to it until at least five days, or seven, or more, depending on your comfort level to prevent tumor formation.
This is the type of bandages that were used to wrap the fractures, dislocations, and sprains in the past, a short, wide bandage that forces the fracture and heals the most fragile parts, especially in children and women, as it does not allow for heat or cold.
It is to take sugar from the breast of the goat, which is the opening of the milk vessel in the teats of the goat when milking it, to make it foam as if it were not that it is washed with egg whites and made unfoamy and thin, then it is to be heated.
Description of another bandage, it forces the wound to be cut and torn off, it is taken from the skin, flesh, clothes, sheets, mats, and mugwort from each one twelve dirhams and a hundred and five dirhams from each one five dirhams and from the mortar thirty-six dirhams, and from the clay of Armenia or Rome thirty-six dirhams. All should be cut and mixed with water of the mortar or with egg whites if the cheese is sour, then this bandage is used as it is good for mending broken bones quickly and it suits more people for correction.
Another bandage that is good for mending and tearing off, it is taken from the skin, flesh, clothes, sheets, mats, and mugwort from each one twelve dirhams and a hundred and five dirhams from each one five dirhams and from the clay of Armenia or Rome thirty-six dirhams. All should be cut gently and mixed with water or egg whites, it is used.
The excerpt discusses a splint for the limbs and bones of the lower extremities, which is placed on the affected area to support the joints, bones, and fractures. The splint is made from moulded wax and oiled, and placed on the affected site. This splint does not have any reinforcing force.
However, it is excellent for stabilizing the hard tumor and relieving pain, especially, another type of splint is required to compress the broken bone. This splint uses rice paper and soft kush paper, all of which are soaked and wrapped in moisture, and a short splint is used to fix the fracture of the bone.
And if you want to analyze the remaining of the tumor, take from the gutta and the camphor, the nail of saffron and the finest part of the ginger from each part, mix them all together and grind them with the paint if the part is not hard, but if it is hard, grind it with vinegar or water and use it.
Another type of splint is stronger for analysis than the first one, used when a hard tumor occurs during bone fracture, it takes from the gutta and the roots of the cinnamon, the basil, the king's bowl, marzananjush, and the nail of saffron and camphor from each part.
Everyone should wash their hands with water or acid water, or paint, according to the temperature and vitality of the organ, and as for amputation, it was not mentioned in his book that he should place on the broken bone when cutting it.
Except for the cauterant of shoat fat and oil, it is only mentioned that it should be between the tightness and the hardness, and as for Jalynus, he saw that things should be placed on the broken bone when cutting it, such as things with holes containing heat like mercury and sulfur and lac and similar to what we mentioned.
The description of cauterants benefits the pain and hunger, it takes a cloth, soap, human hair or bird's feather, salt, and parts whether water or acid water is washed and wet and moistened, and as for the amount that should remain in the bandage.
Then it is allowed because if there was no pain or crying and the broken bone did not move from its position, then it should not be bandaged for a long time because if it happened in its position, it would be a severe crying or worry or blowing.
So start bandaging it in time and do not delay the examination, then take a wet salty bone or cartilage and dip it in cold water and clean the position until the pain is healed and the hunger is healed, then leave the organ to rest for an hour.
Then place the warm bag of moistened cloth or rose oil on it for a night until the burning tumor settles, the organ's rhythm returns, and its pain subsides. Then return it to gentle firmness and smooth movement, without overdoing it.
And keep it until it is expelled, as I saw that the tumor, redness, pain, rhythm, and all symptoms have truly disappeared and returned to gentle firmness and movement, just as before, if nothing unusual has occurred in the organ.
Do not repeat it after three days, or four, or five, or seven, and it may leave for twenty days according to the condition of the organ as we said until if necessary the breaking and approaching the meat on it.
Also increase it in firmness more than the first one, and also increase in stimulating food for the patient as mentioned, as I saw that the place of the breaking is weak and swollen more than what is appropriate, so know that the food is prevented from reaching it.
Then use cold water every time you repeat it and let that be in every three days to reduce firmness slightly, as this action is done to the organ with food and quickly expels it, and what the cunning ones of the deceivers do from breaking the organ once more.
If he does not first apply the appropriate method and then applies force, it is an error on his part and a great blunder, even if it is correct according to their earlier writings, as they have done with it and I have seen no effect from any of them. The correctness is that he should not do it.
The second part.
In the fracture of the side of the head.
There are many types of fractures of the side of the head and different shapes and causes, some of which may be caused by a blow from a sword, either that the entire bone breaks or it ends with the splinter that is under the bone. Just as the quill does in the reed.
Therefore, this type of fracture is called a 'quill' fracture, and it may be that the sword cuts some bone and leaves the face intact but does not cut through to the rest of it, and this type of fracture is called an open fracture, and the wound in these fractures may be large or small.
And from the fracture it may be a flap or a rupture and its cause is a blow from a stone or falling on a stone or something like that, and this fracture may be open or it may be inside the bone.
This excerpt discusses the nature of two fractures, which can be either large or small. The fracture can also be concealed within the bone, specifically in the scalp region, and is considered a superficial injury.
Therefore, this type of fracture is referred to as a scalp fracture. It can be caused by a fall or impact from a stone, which penetrates the bone and creates a wound similar to that of a nail. If it enters the bone, it can cause damage to a part of it.
This excerpt discusses that the most common location for these fractures is in the soft skull of children, and all types of fractures have both exposed and hidden surfaces. The treatment for each type of fracture will depend on its location, and they can be identified by examining them.
The excerpt explains that the fractures are examined using forceps and removing decayed meat from them, while scalp fractures are identified by exposing the bone, cleaning it with gauze, and applying a bandage. The fracture will appear black, and the treatment of the fracture depends on its symptoms first.
This excerpt discusses that signs of fear such as trembling, anxiety, loss of consciousness, hearing loss, and high fever, along with pupil dilation and redness, are indicative of a severe condition. In this case, it is better not to approach or treat the patient, as death is likely to occur with these symptoms in most cases.
When I see symptoms that are not dangerous and seek safety, then I treat them, because if the wound reaches the bone in the first place it is cut, that was during the winter months.
It is preferred to try to remove the bone before the fourteenth day, regardless of the case, and if it is in the summer, it is preferable to remove the bone before the seventh day to prevent what is under the bone from damaging the covering and exposing those symptoms we described.
If the bone is broken and has reached the damaged skin on the brain, with hair and redness, it is preferred to cut off the part that is swollen and inflamed, which I described as the end of the incised wound.
The bone is exposed on any side that you can reach and according to the shape of the wound and what is hidden under the skin, if you expose the bone when you expose the bone, it is preferred to be followed by what is recommended.
It is to dress the wound with a wide incision in the blood and ointment and close the wound until the tumor is healed and the bleeding stops, then to pull out the bone and extract it, which is done on one of the two sides of the work.
The single face is to cut the bone with a fine, narrow incision, like this image.
Then use another cut after this, exposing a little more of it, like this image.
Then use another cut, exposing more of it, with different cuts some deeper and some shorter, reaching the highest part of its ribs and should be made from good steel or well-made bone.
And use the hammer on the cut to avoid damaging the head and hurting it, as if the bone is strong and hard, it is best to encircle it before using the cuts with non-penetrating chisels instead of penetrating chisels.
Because it does not exceed the width of the chest bone behind it, so that the chisel has a more curved edge than the sharp head of the hammer, almost like a small circle that prevents it from piercing and damaging the bone.
And it is best for you to take several chisels that can be adjusted to the width of the bone until each one is ready for the length and thickness of the chest, and this is a picture of three types. From the instruments: large, medium, and small.
And how to thrust the probe around a broken bone is to place the probe on the bone and move it with your fingers until you learn that the bone has been passed and then transfer the probe to another position and make sure that between each probe there is a sufficient gap or as close to it.
Then cut the pieces between each probe as much as you can manage with your grip, and do this until the bone is removed either by your hand or by some other tool from among the instruments I have mentioned for that purpose.
Like the dissector and the clavicle saw, and it is advisable that you be very careful not to cut or cut off any part of the bone, if you have managed to separate the bone from the screw and remove it, it is advisable to clean it.
And smooth out any remaining roughness in the bone with another instrument that is similar to the saw but it should be more refined and pleasant than other saws, if there are some small bones or fragments left, you can remove them with your tools.
Then treat the wound after that with the scalpel and the retractor that is mentioned, and as for the other part of the work, it is a simple excision far from the groove mentioned by Galen and praised by Mahomet, this is what he said. It is preferred that you first remove a part of the bone from the area where the fracture is most severe and most prominent, so that when you remove that part, the hinge of this eyeball's segment appears under it, and this is its appearance:
The eyeball segment should be slightly hollowed without cutting anything, and the sharp part of it should be on the projecting sides of its length as you see, so that the eyeball segment is supported by the epiphysis and the face of the segmented bone, and then strike the segment from one side.
Use a small forceps to cut all the bones in the same direction and be safe from the risk of accidental injury, even if the practitioner is less knowledgeable than others and asks them, yes, and even if they are inexperienced.
If something remains necessary for the bone inside some parts of the bone, cut it off from it with the same side of the eyeball segment and remove it from there without causing any harm or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone did not reach the epiphysis and the part that was cut from the bone had white and rough edges remaining in it, it is preferred to remove those whites and raise those rougher edges by cutting them with a sharp edge that has been taken from it several different measures so that you can use them in all their positions and correct them according to what guides you in the work.
The broken bone and its shape, and it is recommended that you use in your first attempt to disarticulate the bone expose those joints then use a finer one and continue doing so until you reach the use of its finest and most refined parts.
And as for the small hair-like fractures and gentle cracks, it is recommended that you treat each one according to what leads to their healing, which is something not hidden from those who are in this trade, the lowest grade and stand on what we have written and explained in the large fractures.
If the dressing remains open at the bone's end, it is recommended that you take a small crack on the size of the wound and dip it in oil and ghee and place it on the mouth of the wound then take another smaller or more fragmented crack. And dip it in the juice and oil and ghee and place it on the first crack and make that with what you can afford lest it burden the bandage then use a wide ribbon from above and do not pull it too much only until the wound holds.
And use this treatment for a day or two until the hot tumor is healed then close it and use after that the drugs that are with it such as oils of sugar cane, ghee, ghee, and almond oil, and nutmeg, and make from these drugs needles.
Keep the wound clean and use medication that will not cause it to become infected or inflamed. Make sure your efforts in treating the wound are thorough and do not allow impurities to accumulate.
Because if the phlegm accumulates on the brain's cloak, it corrupts and weakens it, and this can happen even when the skull is exposed due to the bones being removed, especially if the treatment is neglected.
If the white coating on the surface of the eye is seen, know that it is a sign of the disease and that it only occurs when the medication given in sufficient strength to overcome it causes it.
It is recommended to mix three parts of rose oil with a good beating and add it to the skull, then apply the treatment with the appropriate types of medication until it is cleared.
The third part.
If the nose is broken, it must be repaired.
Understand that the nose is only broken if both of its upper parts are fractured or one of them, as they are bones and not flesh, do not break, but only become swollen, red, and sore.
When one of the sides of the nose is broken, it is recommended to insert the little finger into the nasal bone's hole and mend the break from inside with your other thumb until the nose returns to its natural shape and you should do this carefully not to cause further injury to the patient.
If the break is in the upper part of the nose and it has not been hit by a finger, it should be mended with a small cut on the edge of the thumb, and if the break is in both sides, do the same, and start mending it on the first day of the break.
If it is possible and not later than the seventh or tenth day after the swelling of the burned part, then insert your little finger into the nasal bone's hole with a small cut from the crack of the cartilage, if the break is in one side, or insert two fingers if it is in both sides.
The cut should be deep enough to cover the nasal bone, and some early surgeons advised to grease the cut and change it every day, but I don't see that, rather it is recommended to grease the cut with egg white mixed with a little of the thick soup of onions.
Then leave the cut until the bone becomes firm and the ribs are thickened, and you can insert the cut's position into the nose with a rubber tube of the garden hose after it is damaged by a small cut, so that the cut's hold on the nasal bone is stronger and does not prevent the patient from breathing.
Do not consider this unnecessary if you want to make the nose and if you want to make the dough, for the nose to be exposed during your work and the hot iron to close the nose with a piece of linen or a cloth soaked in vinegar or something from the decoction of digitalis.
If the nose was not exposed, it is preferred that you close it from outside with black soot and charcoal that has been whitened with egg yolk, then put a linen bandage on it, and do not tie the nose with anything of the battya, for if the bones of the nose break, they break into small cracks.
Or if it tears, it is preferred that you cut it and remove it with the tool that suits it, then clean the cut and treat it with something that softens and moistens from the appropriate mercury, for if there is a wound inside the nose, it is preferred to treat it with mercurial and use mercury tubes. Until it is cleansed.
The fourth section.
It is necessary to break the lower part of the lip.
If the lower lip breaks and there was no cut in the eye, and it only broke from outside and did not break into two pieces, then its knowledge is easier.
When the fracture is in the left femur, the thumb of the right hand should enter the fracture site and also when the fracture is in the right femur, the thumb of the left hand should enter the fracture site to lift the fragment from inside out.
If the fracture is in the teeth, it should be fixed with a wire from both sides until the tooth is firm and can be tightened, if it has grown.
If the fracture is incomplete, it should be fixed with a gold wire or silver or bronze wire, then place a small hook on the broken end and place a large flat nail or a piece of goat skin of equal length to the toe on it. Then tie it from above according to what suits you and make sure it does not break, order the toe to be quiet and still, and make its white food soft by feeding it something different on three consecutive days.
Then tie it from above according to what suits you and make sure it does not break, order the toe to be quiet and still, and make its white food soft by feeding it something different on three consecutive days. Then clean the wound with gum of the goat mixed with egg white or sand of the desert after removing the wire from it and place a linen patch on it, as long as the dressing adheres to it and does not change the bone condition, leave it.
When the fracture has healed sufficiently, it often improves significantly within three weeks. During this time, a warm application is used repeatedly to relieve the pain caused by the swelling. We have previously mentioned this in our treatment of this condition.
If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, and the bone has healed with a thin layer of tissue or skin, it should be gently scraped off using tweezers as mentioned earlier. If the wound opening is narrow, widen it with the scraper according to your needs.
Then, if all the skin or tissue has been removed from the wound and there is nothing left, sew the wound if it is wide, or hold it with one of the probes that are suitable for this purpose. Tighten the suture until the wound is cleared.
The fifth part.
It is necessary to tighten the bandage if it has broken.
The bandage is more likely to break in the front than at the end of the splint, and if it breaks and pulls apart without any skin tissue between, it is easier to tighten.
Or, if there is skin tissue in the fracture, it is more difficult to tighten. If the fracture is not accompanied by a wound, prepare two assistants to adjust one of them on the end of the broken bandage and the other to extend the neck towards the opposite side.
Then straighten the fracture with your fingers until it takes its desired form and does not have a sharp angle or inscription, and if you need more force, place a disc of crack or glass under the head of the ulna.
The bone should be according to your need, it should be flattened and raised by the disc under the head of the ulna until the fracture takes its desired form, if you cannot draw the angle outwards so that it goes deep into the bone, then the ulna should lie on its own foot.
Place a medium-sized wedge under the bone and pull the ulna down until the deep bone rises above the surface, then correct the fracture and straighten it with your fingers.
If you feel that a longitudinal slice of the bone has broken and is moving, it is best to cut through it and pull out that slice if it is held in the bone, then cut it off with one of the cuts you have prepared for that purpose. After the bone has taken its desired form, the device that preserves the splint, which is an object made of wood or iron and this is its appearance:
It resembles a spoon without ornamentation and its size according to what you need from the bone, whether large or small, and as for its length, it is according to what you can do and it has two sides as you see, one wider and the other narrower.
In case of a deep wound that was split open during the removal of a wide bone shard and the tumor was secured, gather the wound edges with sutures and if the split is slight or the tumor was secured, then make a cut and stitch the wound along the extent of the split.
If the tumor is wide, then close the wound in grease or oil and wrap it, and if the bone is not a wound, then it is to carry the firm dough made from the residue of the urine with egg white on it. Place the fine needle on it, then place a ball under the knee if needed, and then take a long sleeve with a narrow side and place it over the needle and the dough, then take a thin slice of linen. Its width should be three fingers and in length as well, then place it in the slit, then place the slit with the linen in the position of the wound, then tighten the bandage on the wound as it rotates. Tie it around his neck and under the sound leg and under the patient's leg, wrap it around all sides and as you see the tightening secures the wound securely and this is what you should know.
Understanding that the gallbladder does not leave the broken bone. Therefore, it is recommended to examine the hip daily whenever you notice that the tendon has relaxed and the gallbladder remains, then correct it and strengthen the tendon, then make the hip lie on its back and make the under the belly small when sleeping at night.
Make his shoulder rise from the side by raising the fracture with the elevation of the scapula or tying his arm to his neck, and do not strain the tendon unless there has been an accident in the position such as a fall or a blow for more than ten days.
Then re-tighten the bandage if you see this. Relax it and leave it until it becomes firm and the fracture of the tendon tightens, strengthens more, and improves in eighteen days. This may be in some people less.
Chapter Six.
Fracture of the knee. Say that the knee is broken at its wide position, and not in its letters, so when it breaks or becomes broken in the middle of it, it is known by touch according to the shape of the fracture.
I have rearranged and presented the text in its natural form from every angle, you can then place the ash of the cremated body with the egg white and white grease on top of a slice of thin board, then place a wide bandage on top of it.
Place a thin bandage all over it or a little more, if the grease under the bandage seeps out in a position of the finger tip, wipe it with white grease until the bandage settles down, then press from above with a long glove.
Press firmly and evenly with the bandage until it does not come off from its position, and check the tendon every day as long as the tendon is still in its place, and let the tendon heal on the correct side, and the finger will be recovered in twenty days.
After a day or fifteen days, if you complete this number of days, heal the tendon and you will be safe because it is one of the bones that does not fear whitening or piercing, as it was a white bone beneath the skin, it was torn off and extracted. And make what you mentioned in breaking the tension from the hard-growing tumor if something happens of that.
The seventh chapter.
It is necessary to solve the chest using algebra.
If the chest splits in the middle, it is more likely to split and spread, and symptoms include a tendency towards the lower part, exposing severe pain, difficulty breathing, and vomiting.
It is possible that the blood flows out and the pulse can be felt in the broken bone, and it should be placed on its side with the elbows bent towards the sides and the heels of the feet together to straighten it on both sides.
And the patient agreed until the shape of the bone returns to what is desired, then place a bandage and a compress above it with a pad from a ruffle or a cloth and wrap it in the shadow after breaking it into cracks. Then, tighten the knot around the broken bone to prevent it from coming off, and wrap the bandage over the wound several times and tighten it firmly but not too much, and check the knot in every moment, and as he rests, it becomes tighter.
And if there is a need to treat it when vomiting, pain or swelling appears, proceed with treatment and remove the bandage and correct what is exposed according to its treatment, and then wrap the bandage if I see that. He must face and apply the force until it is released.
The eighth chapter.
It is necessary to cut the edges when they are broken, knowing that the cuts occur only in the narrow parts of the ribs and their sides from the front, as they are sensitive and it is known that this is not obvious during examination with the fingers.
It should be smoothed over the strong face with the fingers until it is aligned as it should be, then the fractured bone is held by a splint if needed, for if the rib fracture is inclined towards the inside, it exposes to severe pain.
It should be cut like a knife that exposes the ribs for the bone to cut the cloth and also expose severe pain in the stomach, vomiting, and bleeding, and many patients have been treated with great difficulty.
Some of them say it is better to make the food of the splint produce wind and air to expand the belly, push the fracture outwards, and we reject this as it is a guarantee for the occurrence of the hard tumor if it has not occurred, and if it has occurred, it increases in it and confirms it.
Some of them say that a covering should be placed on the site, then forcefully sucked, as if measuring, but it fears that it will attract curiosity to the site due to its weakness, and some of them say that it should be covered with a plate that has been immersed in hot oil.
A blister may appear between the toes until it is filled with pus if the tendon is pulled upwards, then the wound is treated with the treatment of a boil from food and medicine, but if the wound becomes severe, it is not tolerated. The bone used to cover the wound was a painful one, and we feared for the blister, so it is recommended to cut on the site and expose the broken nail, then insert the instrument that preserves the puff and cut the bone and take it out.
Then we collect the wound's scab if it is large, and treat it with ointment until it comes off, and during this, a hot wrap is applied on top of it and the wound is treated with the ointment from the turmeric and applied to the site and the blister is treated with what is inside the tumor.
It lies on the side that is hidden from the sleep until it comes off.
The ninth chapter.
It is necessary to sharpen the spine and neck.
And if the bones of the neck are affected by a fracture and show what is exposed to them, and even more so with the spine, and its ribs also, if you expose this to one and want to know whether he can be cured or not,... For if I saw his hands had become limp, trembling, and lifeless, and could not stretch them, nor close them, and if he had cut or broken them with a knife, he did not feel it and did not find any pain in them, then I knew that he would not be cured in any of the cases and he is dead.
And if he could move them and feel pain in them with cutting and breaking, then I knew that the bones had given way and that the patient could be cured with treatment. If the spine was affected in the same way and you wanted to know whether it could also be cured or not,...
For if you saw that his hands had become limp and something similar had happened to them as happened in the hands, then if he lay on his back, wind and saliva would escape without his will, and if he lay on his side, belching would occur without his will. When lying on his back and desiring to vomit, if he was unable to do so, then he should be informed that it is incurable and there is no treatment for it, as nothing was presented to him that could have been treated from it. The treatment for what occurred was to soothe the hot tumor.
Apply the ointment of rose on the swollen part three times a day until the hot tumor is soothing. Then, place one of the firm, raised, non-sticky bandages on the affected area and tighten it with a string and order it to be still and quiet.
He should not sleep on the side where he does not feel pain until he gets up, as if it happened in the bone during the night, a sore or something that can come out of it, it is better to shave his skin and remove that bone. Then, gather the wound if it is large with a bandage, then treat with salted marshmallows until it comes out, as if the last bone of the toe breaks and it is the cause of the sin, it is better to insert the catheter from the left hand into the seat.
Then, straighten the broken bone with the other hand and tighten it according to what can be done, and then place the bandage and the gauze on it if it swells, then lift it.
If you suspect a broken bone in your hand, cut the area open and remove it, and treat the wound with the treatment that is offered until it heals.
The Tenth Chapter.
It is necessary to break the wedge.
If the ribs are broken, know that if they break, it is only because they split along their sides and stretch out in length, leaning towards the inside, causing pain in the place, and we cut off the affected limb. However, do not cut too much, for fear of causing more harm than good.
And pass your hand over it until you find the position of the fracture, whether it is on the sides or not, according to what suits you from the adjustment until it resembles its natural shape.
If the fracture is long or has gone inside, place a bandage on the abdomen until you adjust the fracture, then put a bandage made of wood or skin on it and tighten it.
Do not fear the movement of the fracture and the loosening of the bandage, and fill the tendons with what fills them until the pressure is even and the abdomen is calm, and order the patient to sleep on his back or on the correct side, for the wound will be healed.
Ignore the depth and cut it until the hot tumor settles and carries what it contains ahead, then return to its width and strengthen it as appropriate, for if the bone has exposed surfaces or has torn from its sides something that should not be removed.
Do not touch but leave it outside as we said and let it strengthen until it comes out.
The twelfth chapter.
In the width of the bone, the knee is broken.
The knee is between the thigh and the toe, if it breaks, cut it on both sides of one of them so that it takes an arch with a medium curve as shown in this picture.
And tie two bands on its sides, then fasten it from a raised position and place the broken leg on the seat, then place the broken arm on the arch until the hip becomes attached to the middle of the curve of the arch, then fasten something heavy from above.
Or the servant lowers it and the surgeon fixes the fracture with both hands until the fracture is in its place, and the other face is that the patient lies on his heel and ties his hand from his neck with a bandage.
The servants are then ordered to secure the upper part of the fracture with one hand and the lower part with the other, and to extend each of them towards their respective sides. If you wish for the extension to be stronger, have the servant tie a cord under the fracture and above it, and extend it from both servants towards their respective sides.
If the fracture is near the angle of the scapula, it is best to have the cord pass under the shoulder and above the fracture towards the girdle, and if the fracture is near the girdle, it is best to have the cord pass on that position and on the girdle itself.
Then, straighten the fracture gently until it is in its proper position and does not cause further damage. If the fracture does not have a hot gape, leave it as is and place a slab of parchment moistened with vinegar and sprinkled with rose on it from the seventh day.
Until the tumor is healed, keep the extension tight and cover the fracture with a bandage, then take a new crack from the bandage and place the arm on the same shoulder and put your hand open on the hilt of it.
The fracture and swelling on the thigh and shoulder should make the shoulder bear the weight of the arm, unless prevented by some obstacle, and unless there is no broken bone in your body, then use your arms.
The bandage should be placed on the fracture itself, with a bandage that is more sloped and stronger than all the other bandages, and to make sure that the length of the bandages corresponds to the fracture, increase the length by three fingers from each side.
Then, tighten the bandages on the swollen joint that was mentioned in the first section.
The swelling should be on the position of the fracture.
As the swelling decreased after the fracture, I saw the bandages and swelling as we said in the first section when you put on the bandages for your limb from your bed, so do the same.
If you fear the hard tumor, leave the swelling and bandages as we said in the first section. Today, if it has not happened in three days, examine the pulse every day to prevent a wound or spasm or to stop food from reaching the limb due to excessive swelling, and fix that as we mentioned.
In case you are confident that nothing like this will happen, do not apply the suture until many days have passed, and the edge of the wound be raised and the edges pressed against the abdomen, and the flap is placed under the hip, filled with soft sand.
Check the shape of the broken bone or the suture repeatedly, day and night, to prevent it from deforming or weakening the suture. Fix this by your effort, and make the wound dressing at its proper level, as we mentioned that the food of the wound should be soft, even if the bones are already strengthened.
It is preferred that the food of the hip and thigh be increased, as usually they strengthen in forty days. Then it is recommended to apply a suture and use the bath and treat with the appropriate ointment, if the fracture is open and gaping.
Do not remove the suture after five days or two months.
The thirteenth chapter.
In the treatment of fractures of the arm.
The arm is a bone made of two parts, one larger and the other smaller. The larger part is called the humerus, which is above the elbow, and the smaller one is the ulna, which is below it. If the larger bone breaks, it is more difficult to heal than if only the smaller one breaks.
When the small upper windpipe breaks, its branch is easier to see and it can be seen more quickly. When the lower windpipe breaks, it was broken in a jagged manner and it was hard to see. If both bones break at the same time, then the bone that broke the small upper windpipe is the one that broke.
When the doctor sees that the small windpipe is broken, he should make the incision wider and deeper until the larger windpipe is broken. If both are broken, then the incision should be made as wide and strong as possible.
It is recommended that the doctor place his hand in a specific position when cutting the windpipe, with the hand on top of all fingers and the thumb lower than all other fingers, and the wrist resting on itself.
The table should be at an angle so that the wrist does not become strained.
Then, the server of the arm should be extended either by his hand or his fingers, and another server should be extended from above as well. Then, the doctor should straighten the bone until it is in its best possible position, if it is broken into pieces, then it should be put back together.
Break each bone in its place, for if it appears prominent with a rough surface, without any burn, it is taken from the section we mentioned earlier, and if the fracture is with a wound, it has its own door.
This treatment is to be taken from here, for if the prominence is in the first joint of the bone and the wound is hot, the fracture is made with a piece of twisted white ginger and let it be moderate between thistle and rhubarb, and sharpen the fracture on it until the tumor is healed.
Take off the twisted ginger and place the ointment made from the ash of the ginger with egg white, then carry the shoulders and make the shoulder that is placed on the fracture a little lower and more firm, and know that the number of shoulders in the arm is more in some cases.
The fracture was in one or two winds, then make your strength on the place of the fracture firmer and stronger, and as you raise it up or down, make your strength a little higher than what is mentioned at the beginning of this section.
Let the fracture that is made on the fracture be soft and not hard, and the cut that is made with it from special pieces is moderate between rhubarb and ginger as we mentioned, and examine the bone and the tendon after some days.
When something needs to be repaired, such as an abscess in the body, it is recommended that the affected part be washed with warm water until the abscess is filled and the part becomes less inflamed overnight to rest, then resume its normal state.
If the swelling has subsided and the bone is still intact or has healed, then this should be corrected with all your effort. Also, if food is preventing the body from receiving nutrition due to excessive swelling, it is recommended that it be given in small amounts and left for a few days until the food is absorbed, then the swelling should be treated again.
If nothing has been exposed as mentioned, it should not be treated except after twenty days or so, then the patient should place their hand on their neck with their elbow relaxed and their shoulder held back, and they should conserve their effort from violent movements and make their sleep on their stomach.
And know that this fracture from the shoulder heals in thirty days or in two and a half months, or it may take eighteen days depending on the state of the joints and the strength of the patient.
The thirteenth chapter.
In surgery, the breaking of the hand and fingers is done in arithmetic.
The incision of the hand and fingers is not deep, it only reveals the wound, while the incision of the fingertips is very deep, when the wound is revealed.
The patient should sit with his elbow resting on a chair at the same level.
Then he should place his hand on it, extend his bone saw, and the surgeon will straighten it until it breaks well, if no fracture occurs, then the clamp and the forceps should be held above the position of the fracture.
The fracture is described as a transverse fracture, if the fracture is below the palm towards the inner side of the thumb, then make a spherical model of the fracture and order the patient to hold it with his broken thumb, then the long fracture will be bent.
The bandage should be made of skin to prevent it from sticking to the skin with all the fingers, and it should be bent according to what is needed, if the fracture is outside, then make the bandage above and another one below in the hand to make the hand open standing.
Then the splint is placed on the finger as the hand rotates and interlaces the fingers, and if the fracture is in one of the phalanges, then the reduction should be made according to what is appropriate, and then the finger should be held with the thumb and if you want, a small splint can be placed on the fragment to stabilize the fracture.
And if the fracture is in any of the phalanges other than the middle and ring fingers, or the distal and proximal phalanges, it should be reduced and tied with the adjacent finger, or a small splint can be placed on it.
As we mentioned in the reduction and inspection of the finger while holding it and after, if a tumor is found, it should be treated according to what is appropriate when something like that happens, and it should be described as much as possible.
The fourteenth chapter.
In the reduction of finger fractures.
The finger phalanx is often broken and appears to be displaced because it bends forward and backward, and its reduction involves placing a splint above and below the fracture line and keeping the thumb resting on the finger tip.
Then each servant splint is bent towards its tip according to the displacement if the fracture is in the middle of the phalanx, and if it is near the base of the finger, it is recommended that a splint be placed on one side, either from gold or similar material.
In its original state, the incision should be made up to the tendon, and the other tendon should be placed above the fracture site. If the fracture is near the knee, then the tendon should be placed near the knee so that the tendon goes below the fracture site. Then, the surgeon should straighten the bone with both hands until it resembles its natural form.
The bone should be broken in a good way, so it is recommended to cover the wound and apply splints if there has been no fever in the patient's body, but if there has been fever, then leave it for days until the hot fever subsides, and then return to treat it.
As for the splint, it is recommended to apply a wide and sturdy bandage twice or three times over the fracture, leaving only the desired part, and then wrap the leg until the knee point becomes the origin of the ligament and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below and make the threads from above from both sides.
Then, apply the bandage on the thigh and leg as desired, and then place the fracture site in the same position as the bone and make it a single grip on the thigh bone, and then close the gap between the thigh and the knee with the curved cut to make the splint even.
Then, starting with medium force on the fracture site, apply three or four lifts and with each lift, reduce the force slightly, carefully.
Then, stretch the thread that you inserted between the ankle and the knee to the side, and then pass it down to the other end until it reaches the thigh bone. Tie it with the other sides of the threads from the opposite side as well.
To prevent the tendon from being pulled out of its place, leave it with medium force until the bone does not cause the member to ache, creak, or gurgle, and if something happens like that, treat it immediately and correct everything that happened as we have mentioned repeatedly.
If there is a soft bone lump in the bone, it is better to smooth it out if possible, and if not, cut it off and remove it, and treat the wound as we have described earlier so that it heals, and this fracture from the ankle may not be aggravated by adding the leg with the tendons.
As we mentioned in the hip and shoulder, but unlike the hip and shoulder, the thighbone does not need to be exposed to the calf without the leg being attached to it, so the person who has it must be operated on forever.
The incision should heal in fifty days, or may take a little longer or a little less, depending on the location and other factors.
The fifteenth chapter.
In the surgery for a broken thigh bone.
The fracture of the thigh bone is often hidden by the swelling and may be either crushed or torn in its parts, accompanied by pain or not.
The treatment of the fracture involves putting the pieces back together with the fingers, until they unite and become stronger, then the splint is removed and a dressing is applied to the wound.
The healing of the fracture is followed by the cure of all the conditions we described in other fractures, such as the hard tumor and its like, until it is able to be removed.
The sixteenth chapter.
In the treatment of a broken leg.
The leg has two bones, one of which is thicker and called the shin bone, and the other is thinner and called the leg bone, and it is subject to the same types of fractures as the shoulder bone. In the event that the shinbone breaks, the leg will turn in all directions, and if the small shinbone breaks, the leg will turn forward, and if the large shinbone breaks, this occurs from the bottom, which is self-evident to you.
Then use the lever and the adjustment and tie the tendons according to that, whether or not it is necessary that if the leg bone breaks, it breaks in a deep and numerous way, then the lever should be less and more, and coordinate your effort with the shinbone.
And in the leg, there is something extra in the arm that is when you adjust the tendons and empty all your work, take two saws from the end of the spring that you use for smoothing the rooms that you put between the notches of the plates or can be from the gourds of the palm or like this.
Choose one that is not too wide and not a scraper, and fold it on the entire length of the leg from the hip down, then place one on the one leg and the other on the opposite side.
So from the hip down the foot, then tie the saws in three points of the sides and middle, for this bandage will prevent the leg from turning to the right and north and walking in a good way, and may use a splint made of wood along the leg.
He should place it in a position to prevent movement, and more especially in fracture if there is a special wound, then he should inspect the leg daily, paying close attention to the tumor or nodule or any other abnormality. When something like this occurs, he should be treated with what is most appropriate to remove it, and the leg bone will heal in about thirty days or so.
The seventeenth chapter.
In fractures of the bones of the male and fingers.
As for the cast, it is not exposed to fracture of the toe and as for the bones of the male, it may be exposed to it, and the fingers are less likely to be exposed to it, only in the most cases.
If the bones of the male are exposed to fracture, and some of them have been sharper than others, he should place his leg on the ground with his foot flat like a plow, then you put your leg on what has risen from those bones and press and flatten it.
Until it returns to its position, then lift the bandage and dressing from above and place under the sole of the foot a small flat head with two sharp points, then press it firmly with a straight motion after cutting off all that is needed.
When three days or four have passed, if the cast is removed, you will find the bones split or broken in a way that you see, and as for if some fingers are broken, you should reassemble them according to what you have described in the book on finger anatomy.
Then make a splint along the finger and slightly raise it, then place this edge under the foot that you have described and sharpened, and if the broken part is from two, three, or more bones,...
Make a splint on all fingers with the joints extended in a diagonal cut and sharpen the edge under the foot and let each end of the edge of the splint be outside the body to achieve a good fixation.
And it is recommended that you do not forget to consider all that we have mentioned for the other fractures of the symptoms that we have mentioned and each edge should be treated accordingly.
The eighth book.
In the fracture of the woman's joy and the man's suffering and the man mentioned.
When the woman's joy is broken, place her in a diagonal position and then move her towards the back of her face slightly and let her hold it with the cloth until it fills up and becomes like a ball in her eye.
The woman then narrows her waist slightly, slightly, and that cloth comes out until it is like a ball at the door of the chamber and returns the bone fracture, then she makes a girdle on her stomach so when she wants to pass, she passes the removed cloth along with it.
She then ties it back in the same way she entered it, and returns to her first girdle after seven days or so, because it will be tightened, and if you want to give milk to a foal, you place a tube on its mouth and insert all the milk into its stomach.
She then blows strongly in the tube until the milk is expelled from the foal's stomach because the fracture returns, then she wraps it in the cloth and stays for the days we described until it is relieved, and when the bone of the injured man or woman is broken in the leg, it is used to treat it.
She then wraps it as we described for the leg of the donkey, and you will not miss the right treatment for these strange fractures that we mentioned only a little about those who had some fever and understand my book because the fracture itself indicates to you in the most cases.
Follow the correct method in cutting and sharpening, and if a man's bone is broken, make an incision to expose it, then place a piece of splint on it, and secure it with stitches or a bandage for three days or so until it heals.
The ninth book.
If the bones are broken with a wound.
It is preferred for one who is offered a fracture with a wound, especially if the bone is large like the knee, ankle, or similar parts, to begin by amputating it from the start, as conditions for amputation are as we have described.
If the wound is oozing blood, it is preferred to begin amputation immediately by applying a poultice of a suitable herb if none is available, then cut into the fracture on that day without delay.
If there is no hot swelling, and if a hot swelling occurs, leave the fracture open until the ninth day to allow the hot swelling to heal, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days, as it will be exposed to severe symptoms.
If the fractured bone is exposed to the skin and is gaping, it is preferred to close it with your hands and sew it, and if you cannot close it with this tool, use a metal needle that is seven finger-widths or eight long. Display it on the wound scale.
Therefore, it is recommended that the surgeon take three or four from it according to the needs of the treatment in each type of wound, and it should be flexible so that it does not stretch out when being moved on it at the time of work.
And it should have a sharp edge on it with a pull on one side and the rest of it should be thick and the lower part should be very thin, like this is its appearance:
And it is called 'burn' in Greek, where they want a small incision, so its sharp edge should be on the side of the little bone and push it with it until if the bone returns to its place and stands up with some standing, the edges of the wound are aligned on each other.
If the broken edge is thin and the tool did not cut it well, it is recommended to cut that part of the bone until the tool can get it, if the bone cannot be returned to its original shape as described in the cuts, then cut it according to the shape of the cuts we mentioned.
Or if you can't cut it, then clean what remains in the bone of the moisture and the cracks, if the bone returns to its original position after being pushed back and finds the wound severe and painful, know that the bone did not return to its original position.
If you can return it to its natural position, do so, for the patient will be greatly benefited, and if you complete the dislocation of the shoulder, insert a small piece of splint or anything that is damp into the wound, especially if it is in the summer and you do not place anything on the wound, neither oil nor anything else.
So that there is no inflammation and corruption, then use the splints while you are free from the shoulder dislocation and leave the wound open by taking a piece of cloth from the clothes and placing it on the edge of the wound.
Be careful not to widen the wound with the fracture, for many doctors have caused this by treating their patients either with death or eating or vomiting, and let your caution be our protection against a wider wound that is contrary to the width of the fracture.
If the wound is narrow or the wound is large and you are afraid of the symptoms of narrowness that we have described, and you feel pain in the position, it is not recommended to put the splints on it and make them tight with small pieces of wood in the position of the splints and force them.
If after a day or two you see that the wound has started to produce pus in it, remove the splint that you put on it with the ointment and the plasters that we use to relieve pain in our operations such as the four-pointed plaster and similar, and it is recommended for you to apply the bandage.
The wound is examined every day in the morning and evening until it heals and discharges, and it is recommended to insert a prosthesis into the bone through which the cut grows downwards easily, because if many days have passed since the incision and the gash has not been closed or cut off from the bone, then know that there are small fragments of bone inside.
It is recommended to clean the wound with a scalpel, and if those fragments were infected, remove them and take out the remaining ones, and the bone was affected by them and caused pain in cutting and removing them, you can do this in both ways.
If the appearance of the wound is inflammation, consumption, or another type of corruption and decay, it is recommended to meet each appearance with the treatment that you offer and describe in that section.
And what you should do when I say and prepare your mind if a large bone breaks and spreads to the bone like the bones of the foot and toe, and similar to the large bones, do not expose it or remove it. In many cases, the death of this is shown but left until it dries out, and if it fell from itself after twenty or thirty days, it may be.
When I see a wound, I treat it if there is a place for treatment, and if not, I leave it.
The 10th chapter.
In the treatment of a fracture that occurs in some parts.
This fracture is often seen in the aftermath of bone fracture, especially near the joints, and may cause deformity of the member and even prevent it from performing its natural function.
If the fracture is angular, use drugs such as mustard, ginger, marshmallow, aloe vera, and other similar substances, taking some or all of them and diluting them with a bitter drink, or with egg white, or with saliva.
And apply it to the fracture with heat and rub it well on it, leaving it for a long time without covering it, then cover it and repeat the process until the fracture heals, or rub it with a small piece of lead powder if possible.
For the lead has a special property of removing all that remains in the members, if the fracture has become necrotic and inflamed, it may be necessary to remove it from above and cut off the unborn tooth or remove it with some of the surrounding tissue until it is removed and the wound is treated until it is clean.
The 10th section of the 20th part.
If the bone is fractured and the part remains soft after that, it should be treated differently from the first case.
If the bone is fractured and the part remains soft after that, it is because of many reasons. Another reason could be the excessive tightening of the ligaments and tying them in places that should not be tied, or it could be due to the excessive tightening of the ligaments until food does not pass through the part, or it could be due to excessive cutting of the ligaments and excessive movements outside of their time, or it could be due to a lack of blood in the wound and weakness of the part.
The treatment for this is to feed the wound and make its body swell with blood, use warm baths, introduce joy and happiness on it, and similarly, then hold the gauze on the part so that food is attracted to it in large amounts or it is softened by the water of life. Until food passes through it and returns to its natural shape.
The 2nd section of the 20th part.
If the fractured bone is treated with immobilization and prevents it from being done on what should be,
When a bone member is fractured or deformed, and becomes difficult to depict, the image of the bone is distorted. However, the bone did not stop its natural function, so it is not advisable to accept the statement of those who claim to have broken the bone from the head, and many inexperienced doctors and surgeons have done this in our country.
This action is extremely dangerous and leads to great harm, but if the fracture and deformation are deliberate, it should be like water in which the marshy herbs such as reed grass and its root and the container of the king are boiled, and so on.
The fractured and deformed bone is similar to the marshy herbs such as reed grass and its root, or it is taken from the raw rice and mixed with chicken fat and olive oil and sherbet, and it is made similar to the tincture of the black cumin that is used with the bath soap and other drugs called antidotes.
The deformation is dissolved by the permanent, thin needle that is in the hand and uses the movement of the bone to all directions at all times, if the fracture has become severe and hardened and required treatment with iron.
It is recommended to dissect the area and cut through the bone or muscle using long, smooth cuts, applying effort and care. Then, treat the wound as described, removing any foreign objects until it is clean.
The third chapter and twenty-eighth section.
The neck is a free-hanging limb from the skeleton that restricts movement and gives shape to the body, causing pain and severe discomfort when exposed. If one's neck is injured, it is recommended that they immediately address it.
The swelling and pain in the neck do not ease with delay, as it worsens the injury. Therefore, it is not recommended to delay, move, or stretch the neck when it is being examined, as it often results in severe, painful inflammation.
However, if the injury is exposed, it is recommended to immediately apply pressure to the neck and leave it until the swelling subsides slightly. Then, allow the body part to soak in warm water and oils and gently return it to its original position, treating each part as described in its place.
The sections of the neck are also arranged according to their position on the body, from the top to the bottom.
The fourth and twentieth chapter.
In the treatment of the lower lip wound.
The wound should be cleaned by removing the debris on both sides, either to remove it completely or to leave a small amount. The patient should rest and recover gradually. The patient should lie down towards the chest until he can no longer swallow and cannot apply the wound dressing, and his tongue becomes red. If the removal is gradual, he may return to the same state with the least amount.
If the wound is completely removed, it should be urgently reapplied and not delayed. The nurse should hold the patient's head and the doctor should gently insert one hand into the wound cavity in the patient's mouth if the wound is from one side.
Or, both hands are inserted into the wound cavity in the patient's mouth if the wound is from both sides and all fingers of his hand are used to support him. The patient is ordered to clean the wound and throw it towards both sides, and the doctor cleans the wound and pushes it back to its original position.
In difficult cases, especially when the wound is extensive, use hot water and soap until the wounds become easy to remove without delaying the healing process. If the wounds close quickly and do not swell, it indicates that the patient has a strong constitution. In such cases, apply ointments made from herbs and soap to promote healing.
Then, secure the bandage with knots, ensuring the patient's neck and head are between two pillows to prevent movement in any direction. This way, the patient will not be able to move his neck or shoulders, and will not be able to swallow anything, thus reducing the risk of choking.
Until the pain subsides and the wound closes, the patient should eat what he has been given, but should not be allowed to open his throat while eating, drinking, or smoking, until the wound is completely closed and clean.
If the wounds become difficult to close when they are not in their proper positions, it is often due to hernias or frequent collapses of the abdomen, and sometimes even death. If you notice this, be aware that it may indicate a serious condition.
Many people die from this in ten days.
The fifth chapter and twenty-fourth section.
In the response to removing the obstacle and trimming the beard.
As for the obstacle, it does not remove from the inner side of its connection to the chest and it may be removed outwardly, and this can be seen by touch. It should be loosened when the patient lies on his back with his arms extended.
Then, the position is pressed with firm pressure, as it returns, and then the bandage and the reins are placed on it and tightened. As for the part that follows the obstacle and is connected to it, it should not be removed except in the navel, as removal may cause it to wrinkle and not return to its original position as we mentioned and what is comfortable for you.
Then, the bandage and the reins are placed on it and the patient is ordered to make a firm movement and remain still until it is removed, and with this treatment on its own, the part that follows the obstacle returns if it is still away from its position.
The sixth chapter and twenty-eighth section.
In the response to removing the obstacle.
Understand that the obstacle can be removed in three ways, one of which is to remove it downwards towards the thigh, another to remove it towards the chest, and possibly upwards towards the obstacle itself, and this is done in the navel.
Do not remove beyond the back of the elbow and do not remove in front of the nerve location, and more it is removed and exits downwards towards the shoulder, especially in those whose meat is little because it exits quickly and enters quickly.
As for those whose meat is much, then it is better that it comes out with difficulty and enters with difficulty, and perhaps some people hit or fall and the shoulder turns sideways and appears to be dislocated, thinking that he has removed it, therefore it is necessary to examine this until you are sure of its safety.
Therefore, in treating it, and if the dislocation is downwards towards the shoulder, then it will be connected between the dislocated and the correct neck, and you will find an obvious contradiction between them and you will find the head of the neck with a bulge and under the shoulder when you touch the head of the neck it will be like a ball.
The patient cannot lift his hand to his ear or move it all the movements, and if he dislocates towards the chest or upwards, then you will find this obvious for touching without hiding.
This dislocation may make it easier to reverse it if it was a trick or if the patient was a child, and he reverses his hand raised above and you make your other hand touch under the shoulder and raise the bone to its place and the server raises his hand and extends it up to its position.
When it is to be removed, it should be pulled down quickly, unless it does not return as we mentioned and has been absent for many days, in which case it should be placed in hot water and the nut should be used that bubbles and boils like the boiling of the hazelnut, the garlic, and the elderflower in water.
Then the nut should be placed on its side and a soft stone of moderate hardness between the lime and the firmness is placed under it, and the doctor should hold the nut with one hand and pull the other hand down.
And the stone should be pushed with his leg if it returns upright, and if you want to repeat this on this side, you should prepare a longer leg and stop it from the edge and insert its knee under the nut's shoulder and raise the shoulder until the nut is fixed in the air. Another server draws the nut's hand down its belly if the nut is light and it is better to secure it with something else to prevent it from returning in an hour or it may return on another side.
And it is that a long plank with a rounded head like the hawn but not too pointed or too thin should be placed on the ground and a crack should be made on it for the nut and the nut should stand on the long plank.
The surgeon then extends their hand from the other side and extends their body from the opposite side, causing the bone to return quickly to its original position. Due to the difficulty in reversing all that has been mentioned, this treatment is used: take a piece of wood approximately the length of two fingers. Then, they present it to about four fingers and make its tip broader, so it is easier to insert it into the depth of the bone on this image: .
Then, a notch is made on the broadened head to prevent damaging the wood, and then it extends under the bone and the hand and wrist over the wood until it is anchored to the metacarpal and sesamoid bones and the side of the hand.
Then, the elbow is placed on the table. The hand is extended downwards and the rest of the body is held firmly from the other side, as the shoulder enters from its socket. If it can be inserted from any side, it is best to place a soft ball under the shoulder.
Then, the soft bandage with resin, ghee, and egg white is carried on the stretcher as it rotates from above. The ball is then firmly pressed from below, under the bone, and the bandage is wrapped around the arm from above and the hand is tied to the neck.
He should not move his hand for seven days, and it is recommended that he eats little food so that the body strengthens quickly to cure the wound, then after seven or five days, he should practice moving it. If it does not swell and does not rest, it has recovered from the wound.
If the joint becomes rough due to moisture exposure or another cause, it is recommended that he apply ointment with three scleras as described in Chapter Three of the book on knees. If this is made and the ligament is healed after seven days, the joint will not become rough.
The tendon and muscle were tapped many times, but it did not heal, fell, and became relaxed, so I knew that the nerve in the top of the patella had either split, extended, or relaxed, and at that time I knew that the joint would never heal in its place.
The incision that is like the chest and abdomen, and extends to the back of the body, should be pulled and pushed with the hand until it returns, and all the swelling and treatment are used until it is cleared, as the appearance after clearing is a lump in the body and slows down movement.
The water ablution should be performed frequently until the body returns to its original state.
The seventh chapter and twentieth section.
In the treatment of abdominal adhesions.
The abdominal wall adhesions are difficult to separate and also return with difficulty, and they separate in all directions, especially forward and backward. The separation of the adhesions is not hidden from you because it is visible and palpable in any shape of separation.
And if the separated abdominal wall is correctly repaired, you will notice this by a clear indication of the separation of the muscle and it cannot be flexed by the elbow or moved with it, and it is recommended that you start and complete the separation from your time before the wound is exposed to hot air.
And if the abdominal wall is exposed to hot air, it is difficult to close it and maybe the wound has not been cleaned, especially if the separation is to the back, then you should do the most severe type of closure and the most painful and many times it does not come down with it.
And close it if it can be returned to its original position, so that the patient's hand is spread with both hands and the doctor's hand is soft and the hand of the doctor is pushed from above the abdominal wall and below it, using both hands or with the thumb until it returns to its position.
When the cut is towards the front, it may be returned by flexing the hand once until it strikes the opposite corner of the palm that meets it. If the cut cannot be returned, use the strong, sudden force of the hand, which is to extend the arm as a waiter would do.
The bandage should be held firmly by the hand, otherwise it may slip when the arm is extended. After wrapping the arm with a cloth or wide strip, the doctor should use his fingers to clean the area and make it easy to remove the splint when removing the finger splint.
Then, the finger is pushed with great force until it returns, and after returning, it is recommended that it carries a bandage with a grip and drying wrap made of egg whites and tightened firmly, and the arm is tied from the neck of the hand and left for several days.
Then, if the finger is firmly fixed in its place, the tendon is cut off from it and left alone, and if the finger does not seem to be swollen no, the bandage and tendon are reapplied and left for a few days until it becomes swollen, and then it is cut. If there is any problem after the finger returns and is cut,
In the movement, the oiling in the bath, gentle beating and rubbing is not easy until it becomes smooth or make an improvisation like a horse's tail then attach it and leave it on for a day and night, then remove it and introduce it into the bath. If it becomes wet, soften the bone with gentle rubbing.
Then, make the improvisation again and a second and third time with entering the bath until it becomes smooth, and if you want to make it dry like the camel's fat, moist and soft with fat, then do this several times until it returns to its original state.
Chapter 8 and 20th.
In the treatment of scar tissue.
Scar tissue on the hand is often difficult to cut and reopening other joints can be difficult unless it is done quickly after the scar tissue has started to form. It is best to make the incision before or after exposing the area.
To reopen the scar tissue, place the scar tissue on a flat surface and spread the patient's hand. The doctor should push it back until it returns to its original position, but if the incision is not all the way through the hand, he should look inside the hand to see if the incision is all the way through.
The assistant should place the patient's extended hand on the table, and then place their own hand on the same side of the disarticulation to prevent the patient's hand from moving. If the patient's hand moves, the assistant should apply a splint to the tumor.
Do not return to it, as it is not possible and cannot be done after some time has passed, unless the disarticulation remains on its own and does no harm except if the hand was relaxed and could not hold anything.
Therefore, learn that the nerve may be cut or severed, but there is no doubt in it except that it should be held tightly as much as possible, and maybe it will benefit and maybe not. If the tendon is reattached, apply the splint we described earlier, hold it tightly for five days.
Then, allow it to rest and exercise the hand if it is difficult to move and there is something in the joint that does not fit well, wash it with warm water and massage it several times until it becomes smooth.
The ninth and tenth sections.
In the treatment of dislocating fingers.
If a finger dislocates, it may dislocate in any direction. When the finger is dislocated, extend it and push the dislocation back with your hand until it returns, then tie the head of the finger to the side from which it dislocated.
After two days, it should be raised and extended until it is balanced that day. If it is tied in the evening to describe itself, it will still hold it in the daytime and train it with movement, and tie it at night for several days until it becomes firm.
Similarly, if it breaks to the inside of the hand, tie it to the opposite side as it was before and do as you did first until it is clean, and similarly, do it when it breaks to all sides.
The thirteenth section.
In the treatment of splitting the back of the hand.
When the splitting of the back of the hand or the back of the neck is complete or all the wounds are open, there is no treatment because death speeds up the healing.
The sign of this is that the hand of death comes out without will and cannot be swallowed, and it often relaxes from it part of its members, such as his leg or arm, or one of them, and if there is only one wound open, it often disappears.
When it spreads to four sides and becomes a hernia, the treatment is that if it occurred from the belly, there is no cure for it or from it, and if it occurred from a fall or blow and such, then.
The excerpt translates to: "It was first mentioned in long treatments of medicine with words that do not add more benefit, and it has been summarized from that a little of what was much of what they brought, which approached the meaning and explained it, and depicted the instrument differently from what was presented and explained.
I say that the hernia that is located in front of the chest has no doubt about it and is not free from it, and the same applies to those on both sides. However, it is treated specifically for the one that is located in the chest because I have described it, which is that it stretches the abdomen on its face.
A band should be wrapped around the chest wall, making it wide and moist, to prevent irritating the chest. Then, a moistened cloth sheet should be placed in a hole in the earth on one side of the band towards the head, and another cloth sheet on the other side of the band towards the legs.
And a servant should hold the cloth sheet to ensure it does not get stuck in the hole, and another servant should hold the other cloth sheet on the same side. Then, it is wrapped around the abdomen of the hernia under the ribs with thin threads and tied to the cloth sheet at the head. The threads are then tied to the cloth sheet.
Then, using another pair of forceps, you should grasp and seize the roots of the plant above, then below the knees, and at the ankles. Then, all the tendons should be gathered together and tied in the other piece of gut that is on his legs. The attendant should then pull each tendon to its respective position on the gut, and the gut should not leave its fixed positions where it is located.
However, if they are not firmly fixed as we said, the surgeon should place his hand on the knee with force until it returns or he places a piece of wood on it. Then he should lie on the board with both feet until it returns. If it does not return with this treatment, he should use a board that is three times the length of a thigh.
He should then dig into the wall that we said is near the wound and insert one end of the board into it, then place the middle of the board on the nail and the surgeon's hands on the other side, and he should press firmly until the nail swells.
And it should return to its place, and if you want to make it out of wood that bends with the hand, it is that you should dig in the ground at the head of the wound, in the back of the house, two pieces of gut that are as long as thighs, and at the feet of the surgeon in the back of the house, two pieces of gut.
After each slab of bone, a nail should be made in it, and all the slabs should be marked on the ground, even until the joint does not move, and then returns, molding the nail which glows in the two nails of the slabs.
In the end of the nail, there should be a mark of its length, as it glows, and in the other two slabs, like that, then the tendon which was tightened in the top of the shank tightens in the nail at the head of the shank, and the tendons which were tightened in the calves tighten in the nail at the feet of the shank.
Then, the servant should stand by each nail, and hold it with the wedge that glows in the nail, and the surgeon should adjust the hammer according to what we have given, and this is a picture of the nail, the servant, and the shank:
Then, after the flap returns and sets the position, it is best that you hold the dry bandage with egg whites, then the sponge, then place a leaf from the board above the bandage, its width being three fingers or so, and its length being as much as it takes to fit the hammer.
And on some correct planks, then tie it to the tendon that should be used, and use the shank gently until it is cleared, because there may still be some glue in the position at the end of the clearance, it is best to use the remedies that dry and smooth with the use of the board we described earlier.
You may use a lead sheet in that case, and it may appear as an excess bone in the last ribs of the back, thinking it will disappear and it will be a false bone, do not expose yourself to this treatment because it may result in death.
The 32nd chapter.
In the treatment of displaced fractures.
Inform them that only the distal end of the radius and ulna are exposed to fracture, and not to the gradual depression and avulsion seen in other bones, and the distal end of the radius is fractured on four sides.
And that it fractures internally and externally, anteriorly and posteriorly, and more commonly internally, less so externally or posteriorly, and an indication of fracture internal is when the patient's normal limb is measured on the healthy side of the patient and it is longer.
And the knee is more lax than normal, and the patient's thigh does not press on the hip when the leg is extended, and the position that follows the hip and is marked by the head of the femur being in that position indicates that the femoral neck is displaced.
And the sign that it is fractured externally is the opposite of these symptoms, and the sign that it is fractured anteriorly is that the patient's leg extends completely except that it does not press on the knee without pain, and the patient's thigh does not extend to the front.
The patient should lie on his back, and the affected leg should be raised and supported with a pillow or blanket. The surgeon will then perform the operation on the affected leg while the other leg is extended. The surgeon should ensure that the affected leg is properly secured and that the other leg is not obstructed during the operation.
The affected leg should be fully extended, and the surgeon will perform the operation on the affected leg while the other leg is extended. The surgeon should ensure that the affected leg is properly secured and that the other leg is not obstructed during the operation. If the deformity is congenital and has not been treated previously, it may not be possible to correct it with surgery. In this case, the patient may require physical therapy or other treatments to manage the deformity.
It is not recommended to expose the patient to this type of deformity. If the patient has a congenital deformity, it is important to address it as soon as possible. The surgeon should begin by mobilizing the joint and moving it in all directions, both inward and outward, and then fixating it with a splint or other device to stabilize the joint.
The patient should not return to normal activity until the surgeon has given the okay. If the patient does not return, it is important to consider using a walking aid such as a cane or crutches to support the affected leg. The surgeon may also recommend using a brace or other device to stabilize the joint and prevent further injury.
He should enter his hands from below the shoulder, then wrap them around the base of the thigh and hold them with the thumb of another finger, a third one, and make their length either from the front towards the opposite side of the hip to the opposite side of the flank, or from the back towards the front.
And his hands should be held as one in order that the patient's body rises from the ground and remains fixed, for this type of hold is common to all four types of holds, and if the knee is turned as we said, then each type has its own specific treatment.
And his personal response if the knee is turned inwards would be for the patient to lie on the correct side, then wrap the thumbs around the base of the thigh between the head of the thigh and the position under the hip.
Then the bandage is pulled up from the opposite side of the hip towards the top of the body towards the opposite side of the flank, and another finger holds the position of the raised thigh firmly with both hands and pulls it out wide, for then it returns to its original position.
This type is the easiest of all surgical treatments that include this member, for if it is difficult for you to enter with this type of surgery, then it is best that you tie both of your legs with a strong bandage on the knees and on the hips and thighs.
After each of his limbs, there is a span of four fingers, and the affected leg is extended more than the others by two finger spans, then it is tied to the head from a piece of wood in the house, and after that, it is on the ground for two arm spans.
Then the groom orders a strong slave to hold the head of the thigh and tie the other leg, and the other slave pushes the tied one away with force because the joint returns quickly, and if the groom's specific treatment is applied, it is done if the wound is external.
It is preferred that the bandage lies on the dressing as we have described in the case of the thigh and tightens the tendon on the affected leg especially and on his chest, then place one piece of wood between his legs and the other between his head, and then place an extra piece of wood in the middle of the dressing firmly.
It may be that a damp cloth is placed on it to avoid hurting the bandage so that the piece of wood is between his thighs and does not sag down when he bends, then each slave extends their hand towards their master, and the doctor squeezes the wound with his hands, and they answer back.
If not, apply the gauze to it and cover it on what we mentioned in the case, unless it is preferred that the tightening of the true be on the side of the correct one, and if the removal is from the front, it is preferred that the leg of the true be extended once while it is on this description with the eye on the abdomen.
The doctor should place the thumb of his right hand on the true hip, then press it with his other hand, and even though it is pressed downwards towards the knee, if the removal is from the back, it is not preferred that the true be extended downwards.
It should be raised on the ground but it is preferred that it be a subject on something firm, just as it is preferred that it also be out of tension and extension according to what we mentioned about its tightening on the abdomen, with its tendons extended.
As we said before and it is preferred that the gauze be applied with the cloth on the position from which the false hip was removed, if the return of the false thigh is completed according to what is required and its sign is not hidden from you, it is preferred that the legs of the true be extended.
If you see them as level and the true is holding the leg and extending it without difficulty, know that the member has returned according to what is required at that time, then tie the fetters and carry the bandage and tighten the gauze so much that the false thigh does not move in any direction.
Rest is required for three days or four, then the stitch and bandage are untied, and the leg is cleaned with another cloth. If you see that they are in order, know that the wound has healed and throw away the splint for walking, and if you see any sign of relaxation.
Return and tighten the stitch and stretch it according to your first stretch, and leave it for three days, then untie it and make the patient walk slowly for days until it becomes strong, if God wills.
The second and third sections.
In the treatment of knee wounding.
The knee wounds heal on three sides, from inside to outside, and from bottom to top, and not from the front of the thigh. An indication of the wound is when you order the splint to wrap its leg around the hip.
If the splint is not tied to the hip, know that the knee is unhealed, and all sides of the wound must be sat on by the patient while the assistant stands behind him to hold his waist and pull him back slightly, then you sit on his hips.
And tie the back of your face to the front of his, and make his leg between your legs, then fasten his knee with yours, and clasp them with your fingers on his knee, then tightly fasten the sides of his knee with yours, and another assistant makes his leg bend until the knee returns to its position.
In order to indicate its return, the thigh is attached to the knee in a non-painful manner, then tightened and the thigh is attached to the knee, then all three are tied together with a ribbon for three days or four, and then they are released, and it is only used a little walking for a few days until it becomes strong.
If you find it difficult to return as we have described and unless you use the strong ligaments that were presented in the treatment of sprains until it returns,
The third chapter and the thirtieth section.
In the treatment of hip dislocation.
The hip may dislocate gradually and slowly, and it may be completely dislocated, and its dislocation can be either inside or outside, and the sign of its dislocation is that you see the hip protruding brightly in the direction from which it was dislocated.
As for treating gradual dislocation, it is easy to return by stretching it with the hand and turning it until it returns, and as for treating complete dislocation, it is recommended that the patient sit in a horizontal position and hold it with the strong hand of the attendant behind his chest in the middle of it.
Then hold your right foot with your left hand from above and your right hand from below in the position of the stirrups, then lift your foot with your left hand, then with your right hand twice, then tighten it with your right hand and lower the front of the foot with your left hand without violence.
Create this twice as we described earlier, then lift the leg of the foot towards the ankle in the third time, and insert the ropes. If you return to this position or twice on this, you will find the leg horizontal, otherwise repeat the work on it, as it returns.
If it does not return as we described and you can, lift the thigh to the ground, spread it wide and dig into the ground, making a deep mark between your fingers, otherwise you will injure the thigh, then the servant will adjust his finger.
Then the servant of the other leg can either be held by hands or a tie attached to his neck, and then stretch all servants in the same way as the one holding him and keep the wet between the thighs of the thigh so that the doctor does not tuck it down below the mark. Then he straightens the surgeon's face with his hands.
Then the servant of the correct leg holds it downwards, and if the surgeon's face returns quickly, then if you find the return of the surgeon's face healthy, hold the bandage and the gauze and tighten them with narrow and thin ribbons and pull the foot with the ribbon below, and it is recommended to relax the nerve that is above the cavity from behind.
Do not allow the tendon to be too tight on it, as it will cause discomfort. Then leave it for two or three days, so that the tendon becomes stiff, and then release it on the third or fourth day. The patient will be unable to walk for forty days.
Before this period, if the patient does not walk much, the tendon may not become inflamed and damaged, and it will not accept further treatment after that. If the tendon is hot, it is recommended to use the remedy we described in a non-treatment and tightening position until it goes away.
The fourth and thirty-second section.
In the treatment of swelling of the man's fingers.
It is recommended to straighten the swollen parts without causing pain, as it is not difficult but easier, if the swelling is in some toes of the foot, then the patient should put his foot on a position at a level from the ground.
Or on a board while standing like a donkey, then place your foot on the parts of those toes and press them with your foot until they return and disappear without showing any sign of swelling in that position.
Then place a board under the sole of his foot so that the whole foot has a head on both sides, and then tighten it firmly and evenly for three days, then remove it and wrap it around his leg for many days until it becomes stronger and returns if God wills.
Chapter Five and Thirty.
In types of incision that are accompanied by wound or by cut or by both wound and cut.
When something of this kind happened and it was treated and ligated, it often followed with death.
Therefore, it is not advisable to offer treatment of this kind except for someone who is skilled in the craft, long-lasting, soft, beneficial, not shaky, and does not have cracks, and uses at first the drugs that reside in the hotter tissues only, and then ligates the wound.
May Allah have mercy on us from the pain with the weakness of the disease and appear to you in it some of the requests, then treat him before the tumor becomes hot.
If the member returns to what you wanted, use the treatment that is suitable for the hotter tissues and treat the wound with what is appropriate for the healing drugs, if the incision was accompanied by a cut and occurred in the bone with bleeding, then remove the exudation. And this reflects what we mentioned in the simple diseases that are presented in their places.
And beware of your effort and purify yourself from entering the path of deceit on what you have promised for me, and it will remain for your benefit and submission to you if Allah wills.
