Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O children, grant me the completion of this book, which is the last part of medical science, for its completion brings peace to you, and through its exposition, and through your declarations, it appears to me that I can complete this treatise, which is a segment of my operation, in other words surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation in our body is now largely private and not as public as before, making the science of this field suffer greatly, and its traces have been forgotten; it has not advanced much beyond a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which corrected many misconceptions and errors within their studies, causing misunderstandings of these fields and extending the effort required.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should regenerate this treatise in the manner of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for the forms of the tools such as cauterizers and other work instruments like adding a description, and for preparation which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why it is difficult to find a skilled craftsman in our own hand for this period, is because the art of medicine is long and requires knowledge that comes only after being exercised in the science of anatomy as described by Galen. He knew about the joints of the members and their forms, their connection and separation; he had knowledge of bones, nerves, and veins, their numbers, and their function. He was familiar with pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations for their emission.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And that is why Hippocrates says about this name that it might be a mistake in the small work, but mostly in the art of our hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already mentioned this in the introduction of this book; whoever does not know what we have told about anatomy will fall into error that could kill people, just as I have seen too many of them, who are formed in this science and abandon it for another science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a physician foolish and experienced who developed an abscess in the neck of a woman, and he incised some arteries in the neck causing great bleeding leading to the woman's death among her companions.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another physician who was about to drain pus from a man whose condition had worsened in his state, and the pus was large. He operated on it and removed that pus with a piece of the bladder, causing that man to die on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already attempted to drain it, and I saw that due to the size of the pus and the position of the patient below him, he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another physician who was paid a salary by a duke of our country for surgery, and he treated a black soldier who had been debilitated by his fracture; and due to the physician's lack of knowledge, he removed the fracture, on the wound, with pins and staples with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to heal.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he would follow it according to his wishes, and afterwards he would dress it, and let it heal for several days, and command that we remove the bandage; and thus within which the wound and the flesh have developed pus, leading to destruction.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I had requested this from him, and he prepared to remove the bandage, achieving tranquility and alleviation of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the corruption was confirmed in the member, so I could not suppress it, and it continued to spread the corruption within the body of the patient.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another physician who punctured an abscess and cancer, and some days later it became magnified in the lord of the patient.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	This is the reason why the cancerous ulcer is pure of melancholic humor, so it does not spread throughout the body, but rather that it's in a member that suffers from being exposed to all.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation in our body be divided into two parts: it is associated with health in the operation itself, and work which involves risks in major positions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already discussed this in all parts of this book where there is operation involving error and fear; so it is necessary for you to consider this and avoid it, so that the pages do not get involved in speaking and deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons for solicitude and protection of God, and your patients for happiness and strength.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way through God's grace for seeking health and hopeful succession, and leave your terrible patients with difficult recovery, and keep your weapons of what makes you afraid, so that recovery remains in your faith and your name does not forsake you: for it is only then that they remain in your glory, and even more so externally in the world and ultimately in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Galen had already said in some of his monographs:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Don't treat sick patients badly, for bad doctors are not found among them".
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have completed this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and it starts with the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is organized about the feet, concerning the forms of instruments and the tools for cauterization, and what is necessary in an operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, concerning drying and piercing, as well as suction cups, plagues, extraction of arrows, and resemblance to those methods; a fully detailed and organized description of the tools' forms.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, concerning restoration and dislocation, as well as the treatment of torsion and resemblance to those methods; an ordered chapter about treatments within the limbs, and the forms of the tools.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On using fire for a cautery and applying sharp medicine, remembering the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	Let us begin with the treatise on all free matters.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Know that I will speak about the quality of those burnt areas and their healing, and in what state is it forbidden to perform a cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Then I say that the discussion about the quality of the burnt area and its healing is long and tedious, requiring deep knowledge, and hidden behind secrecy. Much has been said on this subject by great scholars, and they disagree among themselves, yet I am content with a little of their teachings, fearing prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And thus I say that applying cautery affects the whole body universally, its nature being either pure or impure matter. Except for two conditions, those are the scrotum's pure matter condition.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the condition of the spine and the back, there's impure matter; some would argue that applying cautery should be beneficial to such areas, whereas others would disagree, stating that it is not suitable for diseases that are due to nature and dryness, as fire's nature is one of dryness. It would be inconvenient if a disease from pure and dry material was treated with heat and drying that leads to healing.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he points out that what you've said is the opposite of this, that with cautery, youth should be applied in all diseases of the spine and back that occur in men's bodies. When you compare a man's body to the conditions of fire, you find that a man's body has been burned.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to this discussion, which I've experienced myself several times and have discovered through experimentation.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Nevertheless, let it not be said that this comes after what has already been discussed and exercised in the chapter on cautery techniques, where one learns about the variety of body conditions among men and the locations of diseases within their limbs, as well as the causes of these illnesses, their incidents, and the time span for those situations.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other conditions, there is no cause for alarm, especially in wet and damp diseases; all doctors have agreed on these matters, and they are not divided when it comes to applying cautery to such conditions.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Know this, children, about the secret of healing through cautery using fire and its benefit: when it comes to cautery medicine, burning is involved; for fire is simple, its action affects only the member that is being cauterized and does not spread to other members with the same intensity unless causing minor harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of burning medicine reaches to those members that are in contact with it, and it forcefully brings on difficulties in healing the diseased limb.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Fire, due to its power and the quality of its substance, does not do anything other than overflowing. We have known this through experimentation and many years of service studying the art, understanding the truth about causes; hence I excuse myself for the length of my discussion. If it weren't that such knowledge isn't freely available to you on this subject hidden behind fire, and the quality of its operation within bodies as well as its expulsion which pushes out diseases through a philosophical demonstration that would sharpen your minds, then I wouldn't be taking so much time with this explanation.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that there is disagreement among them about the time when it's best to perform a cautery and they suggest waiting until spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery should be done at any time; because the harm caused by time-related accidents is submerged in the healing of what happens with the application of cautery and especially if it's for pain or necessary pains like swelling and pus, which don't tolerate delay due to fears arising from those that cause malice, which outweighs minor harm entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And do not worry about this in your minds, children, as these are only considered by the common people and many doctors; what they mean is that for every disease being healed with cautery, it's not appropriate all the time, so they hold onto that conclusion.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not this simple when they are concerned about it; cautery is simply in a category of medicine that alters condition and dries out wetness, which causes pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But indeed, unnecessary cautery is superior to medicine due to the value and effectiveness of its operation and the greatness of its master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it's possible that their illness could return at some point in time, depending on the nature of the disease and its location, as well as its effectiveness, and what is accumulated within their body due to excesses, and what gets delivered to them through eating or other causes related to those. It might not return the same kind of pain if cautery is applied to a subtle illness in a limb with few excesses and wetness, like tooth cautery for pain and similar cases; it's possible that such pain won't return within them, although this happens particularly in small cases.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common language is that cautery is the final remedy of medicine, and it's a professional term, not for me to understand in this context, they believe that burning without medical understanding or other reason does not result in healing.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is against this; and I understand that cautery is the final remedy of medicine only when administering methods of treatment in certain illnesses, and those medicines don't work, therefore towards the end of the case one administers cautery, it brings about improvement to that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here, in a more nuanced view, that cautery is the final remedy of medicine, not according to my understanding which comprehends common folk knowledge and many doctors'.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they didn't say this simply because of the equality of gold and its limited quality compared to the material.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the location for cautery does not cause pain, as this is not absolutely true; already I've tried this and found out that it doesn't cause this way in most patients, but cautery with gold is good and better than iron too like they were saying; however, when you do cautery with fire using gold, it's not something to be declared, for it burns according to the quantity you want by the intensity of the gold, and to receive its fume; and if you place the flame on it, the gold melts from the heat, and in the heat several layers form for the craftsman to work on that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason, when doing cautery with iron, one should apply it more gently and more precisely to the right orientation of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already organized this chapter on cautery according to chapters, having organized those about the use within the feet for you, just as I am asking what you want from them.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Regarding cautery for headache due to coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery treatment allows the humidity and coldness to cause a surprising accident of which there are two causes, it is due to excess and fluidity of traumatic flow, called spasm, from the head to the parts of the body and from the ear fluids, as well as restlessness, pain in teeth and stomachache, and universally for all illnesses caused by coldness, whether they be paralytic, excessive or apoplexy, and resembling those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery treatment is as follows, we first advise the patient to be treated with a laxative medicine on their head for three or four nights, depending on what suits the patient and their age and their usual routine.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then instruct them to wash their head with a razor, and then have them place their hands under one of the benches lying down and have their hands placed on their feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the palm of your hand close to the nostril, in between their cheeks.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when the place you've described has been reached, apply the olive cautery to that area by tracing it with your hand and using this method for cautery:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that [cautery tool] on the heated area by descending it, in such a way that your hand constrains it gradually and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand gently and look at the area; if you see some quantity of bone being exposed from within the head, like the quantity of wax in an ear, then lift your hand; otherwise turn your hand with that iron or another tool of the same kind, should it be due to coldness, so that what I've told you can be seen.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the area and let it rest for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place the burnt end of the stick in hot water and let it rest until the layer of smoke is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with tetra-formula balm until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it was said that when the wound opens up, so much more do you feel pain relief, for which it is better and more restorative.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they said that the cautery is performed inside the ear canal, and that the cautery should be kept until a portion of the specificity of the bone is adhered.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then let this part of the bone adhere, and then let it heal.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they said that when the cautery reaches to the bottom, you should begin to exert force within the bone until the bone falls off, and this is how you perform a little surgery:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And it is expected that from that place, vapor from the head will expire.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound remain open for a long time, and then be cured until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	May be that in some cases I do not see these two types of cautery of this kind, but rather in certain individuals due to fear; let it rest, you should know, it's better for health when done; when the head is treated with continuity therapy as we have testified in other body parts, and especially when the head of the patient has a cool nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is better and more effective, you should know this; from that method and by doing that work for health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	Regarding the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When throughout the head there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain in the patient, and it's a continuous issue with them, and they use pillows, cushions, cap compressions, plaster applications, bandages, cloths, various remedies, and especially if their head has already been treated by one cautery that relieves them of those causes, then consider this; if the head of the patient is strong in its creation in nature; then it doesn't experience much heat or intensity from the coldness, therefore they should be treated with another cautery using a different method for that cautery to last longer.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then apply a cautery on that above the forehead, within the cauterization where the cut is made.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Make an incision and expose the quantity of bone that we have measured, then apply a cautery on that with a cautery in the back part behind the head at the spot which is called gout - and this is the spot where suction is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And hold your hand in oil, and do not expose the bone, because the patient will feel a great different pain from the pain of all other head cauterizations due to this.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will tell you this about the cautery in its place, for this cautery is like when you cauterize the corners of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than that which cauterizes the mid area of the head; this is how it should be done.
Capitol ters.	Head done.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Regarding the non-traditional cautery for migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is pain in the head, or pain spreading to the neck, it should be treated with medicines that cool and reduce the head, and then another treatment is administered; this is what I have described for illnesses of the head. If all these do not help, then the cautery treatment is done in two ways: one with medicinal acute burning cauterization, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Apply medicinal burning cautery as follows: take a dollop of garlic and crush it, then remove the tips from both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And place the tip of the lancet where there is pain on the temple, inside which it makes a hole; then leave the incision, inside which the wound is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And strengthen yourself on it by stopping any downward stretching strain, and let it go through the spaces of three hours; then stretch the garlic and leave it for two or three days, and press your finger under water until the place becomes warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And after that, treat it with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you see this, do so with some burning medicines which I have written about in the detailed treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The cautery using iron is done like this: heat it up to use as a cautery, which is the way:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And it is called the lock-knob, where the head of the patient resembles a thorn in shape with some curvature, and there is a small elevation in the middle of them.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And hold your hand over the area of pain, and keep your fingers - to prevent them from being burned by the iron which you have placed there - and move the small iron piece gently at a slow speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount that gets burned due to the size of the cut is more than half of it, raise your hand so that the artery which you have placed there does not get burned either, so that no blood flow comes out.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then dip your finger in salt water and hold it over the area, leave it for three days; and after that place wet cotton on the wound, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you notice this, cauterize at the end of the cuticle as per cautery, and watch out for an incision in the artery in this non-traditional migraine.
Capitol quart.	Head fourth.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Regarding the traditional treatment of migraines with cautery.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines with the treatment we've discussed previously and in the divisions of illnesses, if this doesn't resolve the issue, due to the illness not being alleviated by what we have described for the first cautery with medicine or the one with fire, then understand that you should heat up the surgical knife's cautery until it becomes white-hot. This signifies pressing your finger at the area of pain along a line which is as long as most of what was discussed before, or where the pain is concentrated; and pause for a moment and press that with strength into the artery while piercing through to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be cautious about the continuation of the mandible which causes difficulty in chewing; ensure that the saliva does not stick and the nerves that affect this do not get burned, also making sure there's no muscle spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it's about the fear of blood flow from the artery that is cut, there's concern especially in those who do not understand what they are doing and are inexperienced; leave the operation as it began with the patient.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will recall the regulation of blood flow in an artery incident according to their method, at their place for this freedom.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this illness that does not benefit from this cautery and observes the tolerable body symptoms, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have measured it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you notice this, administer the cautery which we mentioned in the chapter about blood vessel constriction with fire on both fingers, and this is a better type of cautery and more effective.
Capitol .v.	Head .v.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Regarding the treatment for ear pain with cautery.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to irritation and it is treated with anti-inflammatory causes and with another treatment that I have described in the division, if the pain does not subside, then heat up the cautery, which one has the name of 'puncture', like this:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And if it is necessary to make points near the navel, then lead them around the entire area of the ear as if riding a wheel, or in the circuit of each time when the pain is in any.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Continue with the pointed cautery from the tip of the ear gradually, making sure to test and place your hand where you aim.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery hits all parts of the ear, then move on, and after that, treat the areas within them until they heal.
Capitol .vi.	Crown it today.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Regarding cautery treatment.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Gout that is cured with cautery treatment is none other than the species of diseases that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery treatment for the species that results from dryness or muscle twitching of nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of gout using pins and ear-pinchers and poultices, and if you don't confirm your treatment, then know that when you apply cautery to the patient, you use three applications: one on the tip of the ear, another slightly below its warmth, and the third at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	Hold your cautery against the opposite side of the diseased part, where there's only relief when the affected area becomes healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of applying cautery is to apply it near the tip of the ear somewhat above and slightly on top of the crown's base, and then another in the middle area where its length corresponds to the length of this hand gesture, after that hold your hand with the application of cautery until the amount of the disease's essence is burned out.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the method of applying cautery, and it belongs to surgery, its form being before mealtime.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is also very subtle that one or two like this; and note that when applied to excess coarseness in them, it may be done so.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And after that, treat the area until the condition within it has healed.
Capitol .vii.	Crown it seventhly.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Regarding ancient apoplexy treatment with cautery.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said without confirming your treatment, and if the patient does not have fever, then apply cautery on four occasions: over all parts of their head; with each application and the midpoint of the head, as we have said; and apply cautery to the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The way to do the cautery is done according to what was mentioned earlier.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And when it has been treated over the mouth of the stomach; and it's more behind; and then treat that which proceeds.
Capitol .viii.	Crown it eighthly.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Regarding cautery treatment for oblivion caused by phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Note that when given to the patient at mealtime, they should be provided with large pins and ear-pinchers for poultices.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the entire head of the patient and pause over their neck, covering it with an adhesive poultice as described in the treatise on poultices.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And hold that for a few times, which is the method of applying cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Do this as instructed in that order, which I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if it is well with them; but otherwise, then do this to them three times on the last part of their head, which descend from the more prominent part of the head towards the less prominent neck area.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cautery for as long as this has been mentioned, and then treat the cautery according to what follows.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you increase it and the patient tolerates it, then apply cautery in the middle area; and if your dosage is greater, then apply cautery over both ears.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat that until it has healed; and apply the olive oil according to the form given beforehand.
Capitol .ix.	Crown it ninthly.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Regarding treatment with cautery and general relief of all over the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Note that when you proceed with poultice treatment on the head using pins and as we have said; then shave the patient's head, then apply cautery in the middle of the head area, and apply cautery over all ears, and apply cautery to the last part of their neck, and apply three applications of cautery to the cervical vertebrae.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary for the gout of relief in many parts and the patient tolerates it, but the illness is strong, then apply cautery to those four areas on both sides, gradually applying cautery until all the disease's essence has burned out, and lift your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then treat that until it has healed, and this is olive oil cautery.
Capitol .x.	Crown it tenthly.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Regarding treatment with cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Only the phlegmatic type of epilepsy is treated with cautery, not other types.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And note that when you modify the brain for them at mealtime with ear-pinchers and another treatment as we have said in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the side effects of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who doesn't tolerate the medicines, then administer poultices and chewing masticators with ear-pinchers beforehand for several days to improve food digestion.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then cut the patient's head, and then apply a cautery to that spot with a pointed cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and apply another cautery to their forehead, and over each ear on his head she applies a cautery.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can bear it, then apply those cauteries with a paralyzed and softening effect on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use an olive oil-based cautery as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Title:十一
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the treatment of melancholy by cautery.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are damp and decay in the body, then apply those cauteries we have mentioned in the abdominal cavity.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is wet, then give them to drink what purifies the brain as we have previously described in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then cut the head of the patient, and properly make an incision from it around the circle, and then remove that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the patient is sixty years old, and has been taken care of everywhere.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply liniment; it is worthy to use an old remedy from sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire for a while until you reach a measure, which when more is applied to him causes suffering.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then apply it in the middle of the head around the circle, and let him inside until he cools down.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient throughout the week once, using his other regimen while he is being healed; or if you wish, apply cautery making small punctures according to what suits him best, otherwise hold your hand over a cautery like this: this is type of cautery that moistens the brain evenly.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then apply that cooked piece in oil or in powder from mussels.
Capitol .xii.	Title: XII
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the treatment of descending water by cautery.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have been told to start the treatment of water descending in the stomach by the symptoms which I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient what purifies his head, and protect him from all dampness.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that sugar dissolve in water to be drunk for a few days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command him to cleanse his head and apply a cautery in the middle of the head; and then apply two cauterizations on each temple if it is the beginning of the discharge of water in two stomachs, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one stomach.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Apply all the cauterizations to every vein and artery that leaves the network; and let the cauterizations extend in that length across the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And protect yourself from bleeding when it is being cauterized; and if you see his bleeding, stop him with some medicine that's available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come to knowledge about the remedy for extracting arteries and against those, with caution regarding bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some times it is cauterized in the neck between two bones by two cauterizations made one after another.
Capitol .xiii.	Title: XIII
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the treatment of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the stomachs are old and come out through the veins and arteries located manifestly on the head outside, and it is confirmed that this excess causes phlegm-producing humors, then apply a cautery with the one we mentioned in the introduction to water treatment affecting the stomachs, and apply a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauterizations in the neck between the temples, and two cauterizations in the neck between two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you are experiencing excesses, then apply cautery across the entire length of the stomach wall on the outer edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Title: XIV
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the treatment of nasal odor by cautery.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you are treating that with what we have said in the division and your treatment is not improving, then prepare and give three nights worth of hog's mucus to the patient; and then cut the head of the person, and apply an iron cautery treated with olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then apply a thorned cautery over two small scratches on each eyebrow, and do so with two cauterizations.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And watch yourself to ensure you don't ignite that artery.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the method for the thorned cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Title: XV
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the treatment of softening of the eyelids by cautery.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the stomach is softened due to illness or dampness, then apply that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and here is how it should be:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do this, apply that over the two eyebrows in a small area with two cauterizations all around, and let them extend to the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too much on your hand at the cautery, but according to how the inner part of the eyelid is heated.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Regarding the use of a cautery on the eyelid when the skin turns into parts inside and at the palm of the hand.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the hand turns inside and I prick the hand, there are two ways to use a cautery, whether it is with fire or with burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you use a hot cautery, ask the patient to hold it in front of them until they feel their skin similarly like those who are being burned, ensuring that they stay that way until the skin burns; and if you place your hand there, then when it comes out from their birth, then strengthen their hands so that they don't burn themselves while the skin is forming.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then until they are formed and equalized, ask the patient to hold their head in this position, then place your hand on the eyelid of their hands, with a sign indicating it according to the shape of an oak leaf, and make the marking point close to the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And place your hand gently in the middle on the pus of the wound or in the lymphatic swelling on the hand.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And heat the cautery which has this shape for use.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And heat it on the figure which was marked, little by little, in spots that are visible, until the surface of the lesion is burned entirely, appearing just like an oak leaf.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And a sign of health in the patient's work is that you see the eyelid of the hand already tightened and the skin of them being raised from their puncture on the hand.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And raise your hand and leave it there for three days, then place the middle of your hand on their elbow where the skin should have risen by that time.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And treat that with ointment until it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	And if there's any cause for them returning to their origin and the eyelid is softened, then do another treatment with the cautery on that area just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the skin is still in the eyelid, then heat that until it rises to its natural place and becomes equalized, so that the skin doesn't pinch the hand.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And for the cautery with burning medicine, this is to command the patient to feel their skin until it's extended and equalized, then have them make an oak leaf shaped mark on a piece of cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take some familiar soap and a live ash with you. I., or point one, refers to the first item, section, or element in a list or series. In this context, it might signify the beginning of a new chapter, step, or category within the medical treatise. Do this as instructed, and mix those ingredients well, then perform the operation quickly so that it is not delayed; spread this from here on the paper which was made in the shape of an oak leaf, place this above a hand or both together; place your hand near the affected area with pus, and keep the patient's head in this position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the medicine on it and press that a little bit but don't burn yourself as long as the patient feels the sensation of the medicine's bite, which feeling is like being bitten by fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when the patient tolerates that biting sensation, then remove the medicine and keep it in this position; once the biting stops, then reapply the medicine and wash your hand with water; then consider if you've seen the eyelid raised like when washing off a scab, whether that process is done with fire or incision, which is the case here; and if it doesn't return to the place of applying the medicine on the spot where no medicine was used, don't let it heal until your operation is complete and the hand is tightened.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand in the middle of it for its entire duration until the lesion is eradicated from the adjustment, and treat that with definitive ointment or another until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And for this to be necessary, you must keep vigilance in your operation so that the medicine does not fall from your hand onto the skin. If the eyelid is softened after some days and any cause of the hair pinches the hand, then reapply your medicine on that spot which softens the eyelid, precisely as you did initially, and surround it until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of an oak leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	Know that men's hands vary in size and thickness, so adjust your treatment according to this.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not conceal the path of rectitude leading to that which is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Regarding the cautery treatment for a fistula that is in the tear duct of the hand.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with what we have discussed in the divisions of maladies and do not proceed with your treatment, then follow this method for cauterizing it: command the patient to hold their head in this position, and place one of their servants' hands under yours so that they are not burned or disturbed by their head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And place your hand gently in the middle on the pus of the wound or in lymphatic swelling on the hand.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And you apply the heat of the cautery which this is in its form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which is heated, like the shape of a cane or a turkey feather pen, from one end where the cautery is applied.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see that it is penetrating into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to come out like trying to remove it.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But the one that is heated up is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And apply pressure to the fistula if it has opened, and take out any pus and dry it up there.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it hasn't opened, then open it and remove the pus from inside.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And place over it the heated cautery which has been lit, and hold your hand with the hot end of the cautery near the nose opening, so that your hand doesn't disturb or alarm the patient, then pause the cautery in the gray area of the nose and soak that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if during the start of your cautery it penetrates into the nostril, it's good; otherwise, then reapply the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave that for three days, then place a bandage over that spot with grease inside until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if it has been more than eleven days and it hasn't healed, then place on the area a quick acting corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed, and scrape according to what suits you in your judgment.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another method of cauterizing a fistula is as follows: take the place of the fistula and make an incision there and apply over that crack a thin material with the shape of it: And in that area put about one inch of melted lead; and hold your hand to have good control, so not to alarm the patient since the melted lead won't enter into their nose; and when you place on the nasal area a bandage soaked either in egg white or water, the lead will adhere to the fistula site and heal it through wonderful healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula has healed with what we have said about cauterization and healing, it's good; otherwise, then it's necessary to perform nasal surgery and reduce the fistula into the nasal cavity according to its proper location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On cauterization of the cut on the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Infections occur in cuts, and especially in the cuts of babies.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Then, as you treat those cuts with what we have told you in the sections and do not deepen your treatment, then apply the small cautery knife according to this shape that we will show:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its size be determined by the subtlety of the scalpel.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And place that heated tip inside those cuts until the cautery reaches to the ends of the cuts.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And apply bandages inside where it is healing.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On cauterization of the fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the base of the uvula or on the palate or in the base of the teeth there is pus and you make a cut, then when it bursts open, then when it has healed, correct that cut and do not deepen your treatment, then use as directed the size of the cautery according to what received inside the fistula, place this lit into the tube of the fistula, hold your hand so that the heated end reaches to its ends, and do this once or twice at the back; then treat it with what we have told you about treating inside where it is healing until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the healing has been removed and it is healed, it's good; otherwise, then it's necessary to expose the area and remove the infected bone according to what suits your judgment.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On cauterization of teeth and soothing of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are inflamed, and you treat those with medicines instead of cauterization, then place the patient's head in its usual position, and then apply the heated cautery in such a way that you place the tip of it on the tooth and immediately let the heated point penetrate into it gently, while holding your hand close enough to the heat of the fire so that when the end of the tooth is reached by the warmth of the flame.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And lift your hand, and then reapply the cautery several times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And let the patient wash their mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, then rinse that out, so that the inflamed tooth is calmed, the softened gum is strengthened, and the excess moisture is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness, or there is a boil or worms involved, or you do not treat with medicine, then cauterization can be done in two ways: either on the area near the neck (neck region), or using fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization on the neck involves taking cow's horn and boiling it in water, then take out its end and wrap it around the tip of a needle, then immerse this into the hot water, and place that over the painful tooth gently until it is cooled.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then apply some burns there where the heat of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, immerse wool or cloth in the potion above mentioned, then place that over the aching tooth, and place the burning iron over it until the heat of the iron reaches the tip of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, when dealing with the application of heat from fire or iron, you must wait until the tip of the flame or metal is in the center of their chest and the intensity of the heat does not reach the opening of the patient's stomach.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then hold the cautery in a form that will be applied, place it on the tooth and put your hand inside where the heat is being conducted; do this until the pain increases or even the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And then instruct the patient to fill their mouth with good broth due to that heat and keep it for an hour, then they should drink; this is how the heat treatment is done.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply the cautery wherever you see fit according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is how it looks like in the application of the cautery:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the treatment of protruding intestines by cautery.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When the protrusions are caused by phlegm and mixed fluids that do not yield to digestion with medicines, yet you see a slight digestive change, then you hold the cautery in this way, having two hub-like extremities so that you can heat one end of it with smoke from the other end. Place the burning iron over the abscess once, and if necessary again until it reaches the tip of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then hold the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and rest it on the patient for three days, placing a moist cloth in hot broth over them while that which the fire has burned increases.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment and attempts at healing until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the cautery or tube as used is thus.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the treatment of gouty swelling and constriction by cautery.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture invades the pulmonary canal, especially when it is due to a cold body condition, then instruct the patient to start with medicine for evacuation and apply cautery at the site of the kidney's depression.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And make sure that the cautery does not reach the kidneys and do not burn too much of their body, just a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And apply the treatment with another cautery at the junction of the throat in the lower part of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	Apply the same method for the cautery on his collarbone as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with what has been prescribed until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the treatment of lung illness and coughing by cautery.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughing and lung illness are caused by moisture, the patient does not have fever or consumption and it is an old lung ailment, then apply two cauteries on the sternum at the depressed areas of the thorax and abdomen; and another cautery in the middle of the chest between the breasts; and treat the collarbone with the same method as before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your treatment be puncture with the cautery that is called punctum, and its method precedes in the puncturing of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make punctures on the chest; and then treat that with what was prescribed until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And once you have the cautery with three points that constitutes this treatment: for each use, you can perform three cauterizations according to this method:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the treatment of the tickling at the head of the penis (titillication).
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the penis is displaced due to slippery moisture and does not return in time, you should reduce its displacement until it returns according to what is usually customary for returning. Then, while making a slight movement, reposition it so that it turns as we have described. In this case, first reduce the displacement, then make the patient lie on their back or on one side, and raise the part which is at the opening of the gland from above the points of your left hand when you are touching them, if the location is displaced inside.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then hold the cautery with two ends; and this is how it should be:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then apply the treatment with the cautery until it penetrates to the other side; and here will come the image of the cautery treatment as follows: using four points of the cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And they are these subtle ones according to the quantity of the test; and this is how it should be:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some burns are adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place the salted iron on the cautery and have the patient lie on their back, and let the body not be burned for any time until it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in parts above and below the knee, then do this, apply a cautery to the muscle with an iron rod or with a point-shaped cautery, until the joint is confirmed and moisture is reduced and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the use of cautery for the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is inflammation and moisture inside the stomach that exceeds its normal capacity and multiplies within it, and if you continue with the treatment methods without changing, then you might find that the patient is upside down over their knees being stretched out, both their hands and possessions. Then do this: apply one cautery to each foot equivalent in size to a single pointed cautery, and at two cauteries place them on either side of the stomach's opening, forming a triangular pattern; elongate those that are not properly fitted for cautery application by doing this process.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equivalent to the size of two thirds of the thickness of the chain's knot.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, apply a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and here is a circular shape for a cautery as follows:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be treated with a point that reacts to this cautery: and you apply a point on the stomach according to your desire with a needle, then do so by applying a cautery at those points; and treat it with healing procedures until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the use of cautery for the kidney area.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the kidney due to coldness or moisture, or by excess wind that exceeds its normal capacity, and if the patient has been treated as we have said without changing, then you might find that the patient is lying on their back with their head elevated, placing three cauterizations according to this form; place this quantity of treatment over the kidneys where they are located under the armpits, taking into account the position of a person when lying down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let there be the space between each cautery according to the size of a finger, and let the cauterizations follow the length of the body diagonally.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not underestimate what the patient feels about the heat from the cauterization.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of moisture that is absorbed by the length of the chain's knot equals the quantity of the patient's heat; and do not make it too tight; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, which has already stretched out their limbs, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is how it should be for the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it might be possible to apply these cauteries with a surgical knife, when you have skill and caution in this art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overdo the cauterization process, ensure that the heat of the entire chain is absorbed so that it reaches every part of the body and penetrates through tissues where the chain is delicate. Understand this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of kidney abscess with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is irritation or an abscess in the kidney and you want to know whether that abscess is within the tissue of the kidney or near it, then if it's within the kidney tissue, the patient experiences significant weight loss and increasing pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it's near the tissue of the kidney, then the pain is intense and frequently tires out the doctors in treating him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	So have the patient lie on their back; and place your hand over the location of the abscess; and hold the cautery that resembles a stick with a round tip, which was described in another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And apply the cautery there and within where the entire chain is heated up until it reaches the kidneys, until it heals from within.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that by healing other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And only use this method of cautery according to what you've studied in the art of medicine - that which extends and has knowledge of many illnesses. However, sometimes there are some misunderstandings about its application; however, follow that advice well, as it's better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the treatment with a cautery of pleurisy (a lung inflammation).
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient methods of using the points on the aristological lines to treat pleurisy are done according to this manner: take a long slender line found among the aristological lines, which is dry and long, and make its size equal to that of your finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And immerse that in oil and heat it over fire, then apply a cautery to the area located between the continuation of the sternum and the chest; place two small points with a slight inclination toward the side where you would find your beard if standing. Apply two cauterizations near each other at this point between the 5th rib and the waistband, one slightly inclined towards the backside where the beard is found; apply two cauterizations in that area which are inclined between the 5th costal and the waistband ribs, one slightly inclined towards the back. Place another cautery in the middle of the chest; place another on the stomach, and three points at the backside areas; place a cautery where is the space between two shoulders, and two cauterizations on both sides of the waistband, with the cautery that's found between two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not hold your hand over the cautery, but in the manifestation of the disease working on it.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they have told us that some of the men who use iron cautery resembling fire and embers place it in the location between the ribs, inside where it travels from one to another node, as we have said about the node in the lung.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this perforation with cautery there is no fear of the wound, which often happens in the location of the fistula where it does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cautery of the lungs.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat lung disease as we have said about treatment in the division and do not apply your treatment, then if you use cautery on it, there are three ways to do so. All of these are triangular methods. One method is to make three or four lines along the length of the lungs according to the figure of the lung cauterization, which I have already mentioned.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery, the thickness is about one inch or a little less. And the method of applying the cautery is the same method that we have mentioned in lung cauterization.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not hold your hand near the cautery; and the patient lies on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery with two streams, which we have mentioned in the chapter on muscle dislocation. And raise the disease which is at the angle of the lungs so that it moves through the left side of the patient's body without harming them.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And for your elevation, you should raise the body according to the length of the body so that the cauterizations are done according to the breadth of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert both streams inside, ignite it, in that place where those penetrate the back of the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauterizations are done.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, apply three streams with the cautery.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you treat the cautery as long as it has been causing pain for too many days, knowing that this is more effective than other previous causes in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cautery of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization should not be done in general dropsy but only in a localized manner.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat dropsy in the ways of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not apply your treatment, then when you use cautery on it, you should do so with four cauterizations around the navel area, one on the stomach, another on the lung, another on the lungs, two cauterizations between the ribs of each side, one on the right side of the chest, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be similar to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then smooth out the area where the cautery was applied, allowing it to heal for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the cautery as it is understood that these will increase their understanding and aid in healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery for what is being cauterized on the abdomen should be as if it was cut with scissors according to its previous shape, and this is what has been cauterized on the chest should be like an olive according to its previous shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cautery of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with watery dropsy and filled with clear water, it is understood that you should apply cautery to the feet on either side of what is between the auricular (ear) and the annular (ring-like) parts of the foot. Lift your hand near the cautery and do not twist it; and then lift your hand again, without returning it completely as the clear water will drain out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is how the cautery should be: And then apply two cauterizations on each thigh, and in any situation make a cauterization at the end of the surgical instrument.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: put one at the knee and the other in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauterizations.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the opened wound heal over a long period of time so that some water drains out from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat with those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the belly region.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly region is affected by cold and dampness causing discomfort in movement, these are digestive and retaining functions which reside in the stomach and intestines. Treatment should be done using the methods of treatment without applying any other treatments, and sometimes patients undergo cautery due to this discomfort being exhibited; therefore, apply a large cautery on their stomach as previously explained for abdominal area cauterization, with the gastric region cautery, and four small cauterizations around the subtle navel area, a fine-scissored cautery, and a large one on the liver or using two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you encounter excessive dampness and the patient tolerates it, then apply cautery on the navel and on the intestines, and strengthen the adjustment of two cauterizations on the stomach and near the groin areas. This is a perfect cure for young individuals that will not fail.
Capitol .xxxiv.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Regarding the cautery treatment for old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature as old hemorrhoids or one of large humors or from corrupted moisture, and they are cured as we have said in the division and do not confer your treatment, then you should apply three cauterizations on the pus left behind at the spondylh of both small and small triangular ones, and two more cauterizations above the navel cays by two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that the stomach of the patient is chilled and the food they consume has not been digested, and their face appears reddened, then apply a large cautery as was previously described on the stomach; and apply one cauterization on the buttock, and another cauterization on the back of the neck. Let each cauterization sit for some time until it is removed, and soon afterward you will find that they are healed internally.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Regarding the cautery treatment of testicles near their location.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the testicle, then you should apply the cauterization that resembles the shape of a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place the ignited object inside the removed testicle, and continue your hand until it reaches the opening of the vein from which the sperm emerges.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this one or two times, if the sperm is too much, then cauterize each of them according to what we have discussed, and after that, treat those with your prescribed ointments until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you apply a large cautery to the scrotum, it will cause more harm later in youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Regarding the cautery treatment for abscesses that occur naturally in the patient's limbs.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not comply with the procedure we have recommended in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by this, they will be cured with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	So when you see an abscess forming naturally within, and it is old, full of pus and corrupted moisture, then that which is the pus to be drained out should be punctured with a thin probe. And then you will know the depth of the abscess from the location of this mentioned probe in front.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Place the ignited object that resembles a ray shape.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And place the burning cautery in this abscess, and according to the depth where the probe goes in.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And apply this cautery repeatedly inside until those corrupted parts are burned out, once or twice or three times, according to the extent of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be cautious of burning the nerves and veins; or if the abscess reaches into the bladder or the intestines, then avoid all these areas; do this procedure only when the abscess is in a meaty area and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the affected area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area has sealed over and all materials have been removed from it, but still remains red for a long time, then you can know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not from your own body, then you can know that it is penetrating or close to a part of your body, or comes from those causes of which memory will arise in its location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Regarding the cautery treatment for boils.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in boils there is pain due to friction or from large wind pressure, and the inner thigh becomes reddened, then you should puncture each boil with a cautery and apply a cautery on each one, using the point of which you will recall memory.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And after gently applying the cautery to a small spot, you will bring about three linear cautery marks, and thus they will cause more harm later in youth.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Regarding the treatment of the bladder with a cautery.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When it happens in the bladder with softness and weakening due to friction and moisture pressure that the inner thigh does not retain urine, then apply a cautery near the area of pus on the bladder, at the location where the skin begins under the buttock, and apply a single cautery near the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And make the length of each cautery according to the size of the nodules in the foot; apply this with a cautery near the lower part of both sides; or apply two cauterizations if it is necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And use the point-like cauteries as described.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Regarding the treatment of the uterus with a cautery.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is friction and moisture in the uterus, and thus intercourse is prohibited, and her menstrual periods are corrupted, and their occurrence is delayed, and it occurs with pain during urination, then you should know that the area needs to be treated with three cauteries in the circumference of the navel, as we have described for the bladder's cautery; and apply one or two cauterizations near the area on both sides, and use point-like cauteries.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Regarding the treatment of the dislocation of the womb with a cautery.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture swells the part of the womb, and it causes disturbances in its location, a sign is that the thigh extends over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the dislocation is found in the patient's hip joint.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then when you need to cauterize the patient's waist over the spring of his urine with a similar cautery, knowing how to test in the circuit of the spring like this by swirling it, and to prevent the spring from falling into the middle spot of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the shape of the previously mentioned cautery is in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at your disposal, then use another with three cauteries made of large olive wood.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And do the cautery according to the quantity of the heat in the entire chain; and then treat the area where it has been healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cautery for the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the area of urine passage, and its cause is due to friction and moisture, the patient's waist will be healed using what we have said earlier without mixing it with another substance. This method has been proven effective over time. Therefore, you should release the waist from thick fluids using pill-shaped soaked in medicine or artificial pills, or similar substances; then cauterize that area accordingly.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of the cautery in that case is according to two methods: or a cautery with burning medicines, or a cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	There are two known methods, of which one is to apply three triangular cauteries on the waist area over the width of the patient, according to this form; and make those have good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery is the size of the substance mentioned earlier, whether it's an olive or large wood.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	There are times when you should apply the cautery over the middle spot on the head of the anus, for there will be four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize using the circle as described in the dislocation of urine, which includes burning heat throughout the entire chain.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery in heat when pain is attached to urine and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh over the place where you will put your waist which is the pain; and one cautery on the groove for four fingers a little to the left side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if it's a knife-like cautery, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the heat intensity of the chain.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the waist is where the pain extends into the area near your feet, then cauterize that place here with a cautery applied to three points or four or more if it's necessary for that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the waist contains pain extending up to your thigh, then cauterize that area here with a knife-like cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And when performing any cautery, ensure you do not continue until it burns nerves or large veins, as this may result in harm or contraction to the waist.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen both of those; you should apply the cautery over the groove and ultimately in the process of cautering, and the fire-filled bed resulting in the formation of pus within the foot, and causing destruction of all parts of the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And this will lead to a severe abdominal solution, and from that, death occurs.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And some wise ones would say about the cautery for urine: make it resemble a circular iron device where the circumference is that of a hand; and place its opening according to the size of an almond bone or slightly less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle place another tortoise shell; and the space between them is the size of a foot; and those circles should be placed on two parts; and the length of those edges is one or two toes, and make appropriate grooves in the shells aligned with the circles; this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And ignite in the fire until it reddens and sends off sparks, then place it on the urine passage, with the waist held vertically.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then apply three round cauteries in one location.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then let that heal for three days; and cover the wound with lint, allowing it to be open too long; and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis: Oh children of this species of cautery, we have used a few due to the fear of observing it, and for that reason, we have found those who observe it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	And concerning the effects of these cauteries to someone who undergoes them, find out where they are on him.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	And when you cauterize with medicines that adhere, make two perforated circles containing the urine stream from the iron gate; and let the length of the walls be in proportion to their size in the body, being one or two toes.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between each is the size of the substance mentioned; and place them side by side and above, so that they contain themselves among each other according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand on the urine passage while keeping the waist vertically; and hold your hand on the urine passage; and take water to pour between two circles, letting its quality burn gradually over a small fire; keep that for an hour's duration, allowing the waist to experience burning and rubbing - like burning with heat - until the rubbing stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand to the tool and clean off all the water from the used water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let that (heal) for three days and place on it the warmth where the blueness of the healed disorder is, and let it heal in such days, and it will cure your pain; this happens later in youth.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment where it has been healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends within the thigh or the rib, have them stand in the position that holds water as it is done in equal water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about that in the treatise on correcting medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for the ash of both wood and coal, combine them in equal parts, then divide it and place some in a new wave, where the part you leave should be pierced with a small probe, according to how much fits into your fire.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of the wave with another wave on top, heat the live ashes and water which takes those (the wood and coal) for one finger, until you can compress them well with your hand, then let the vapor that comes out from the hot water in the remaining part above the heated ashes dissipate.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, heat it over live coal and another alkali (material), so that it produces a strong heat which is administered in doses during medical operations and in the cautery of other limbs, this operation is done with fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And for some medicines among which the application is made with cautery, such as leeches and honey applied on a wax band that they should be mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And as for one of the ancient's procedure and treatment, which heals water pain and sciatica vein pain, it is magnificently small in that regard. And you say there is no need for other treatments, and it gets healed after one treatment just like I recommend; it becomes strong again in bathing and already adapts to that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be placed close to the heart's vertebra. If there is no vertebra, then place a fig on a small gray; and then immerse this in water where the pain is, or in the thigh, or in the rib, and bind it up.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it stay for a duration of three hours or as long as the patient feels relief in the improvement.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place that in hot water until the patient's body turns red, then introduce it to fire when the pain ceases and they are healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that not everyone should apply cautery with these medicines, but only when there is an evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Mays of Escorides says that when there is a wound in the goat's vein it gets cauterized, making its milk better; and apply the cautery to them according to this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the ribs and under the chest.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take the wound of a dried goat and apply it to fire inside where charcoal is made; and place them over the wool and let it heal until it extends.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this process, without stopping until the sensation of the bite reaches into the water and rests the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cautery is called cattle's cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On Cauterization of Two Pains.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains are in the two for various reasons, such as from impact or strike or due to excessive evacuation, and because of causes similar to those, by infusion of moist material or substances.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is not for cats but in this single type that is done through the effusion of abrasive matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	And so, consider the evacuation of the patient with pills that resemble them, which are made above and below where pain is in three lines according to the width of it; if you can test in each line one or more cauteries or even more, depending on how well tolerated by the patient and its effectiveness.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And a cautery is performed with needle cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, you can do it with three or four needle cauterizations according to this method:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On Cauterization at the beginning of gallbladder issues.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Certain symptoms often accompany this illness in young children, and the signs of its beginning are that it affects their body causing swelling and elevation, as well as movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you find in the lower vertebrae of the back and ribs where they start to rise over other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And then when you notice this and want to stop it, you should apply the cautery in a circular manner according to this method:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	so that the cautery covers the entire part of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, apply the needle cautery along the circuit of the vertebra for two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And make the points close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then heal the area where it has been healed with what we have said before.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Mays advises that cautery should not be administered for gallbladder issues caused by muscle spasms of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol. xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the treatment of gout by cautery and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus how gout caused by internal friction is cured using the method of treatment and not leaving the pains untouched, they are treated with a cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And that is why you apply a cautery to the area near the foot's joint exit in the circuit, using a hot point.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is what an olive-shaped hot point looks like that this is:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise within the joints or to other joints, and such spots are found, then apply the cautery over each joint with three or four points of this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you find that these cauteries are necessary, then apply the cautery and do not press too hard with your hand before it, just around the circumference of the joint.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains rise within the joint and its second part, then administer the cautery which we have described in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the chest, it's called gryphagra, then puncture along the path of the nerves as they flow, puncture at those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the path of the nerves on each knuckle and over the tip of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains occur close to several days in the armpits or muscles, then apply cautery over all parts of the helpers.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not allow the patient to recover well and receive medicines, for if it is done in good order and steam rises with this cautery, health will come from it, God help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the treatment of ruptures through cautery.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When finding a rupture in the veins and observing the intestines before the hernia at the groin, and this is how it begins close by, then instruct that the patient abstains from food for the day and uses gentle remedies so that the opening of his belly can heal.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then guide the patient between your hands on his back, and command that he place his elbows under him so that there is no escape or appearance of the hernia or intestines.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return the thing to your fingers and test the rupture on the bones of the ankle, signaling the end of which is similar to half the circumference in the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then use the cautery with this shape for it:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Ensure that there is motion and sparks during its application.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the hernia or intestines to their cavity, and place your hand over the area in such a way that the hernia does not escape.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant is on their legs, and another is on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery over that signal with your hand on the cautery straight, and guide that into you where you find the bones of the ankle in the middle of the knee; repeat this for another area if you have not succeeded in the first attempt to reach the bones.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely the movement of the hernia during your cautery treatment, do not force the hernia to move on its own that causes death or other serious harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you have the cautery in hand, do not touch the bones, do not complete your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And be aware that the size and measurement of a child's cautery should be subtle according to their grandeur.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then care for the area of the cautery for three days with ointments until the scar from the fire is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with other ointments until it heals.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient lie on their back for 40 days until the area and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And be aware that you should limit the patient's nourishment according to the duration of their recovery period, which stretches his belly, and ensure that the hernia does not escape due to the strain of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when you want to remove it after about 40 days, then administer food properly, and keep that for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And if he is reduced in work and fullness of food and drink, as well as vigorous actions, then when using this complete regimen for recovery, he will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will tell you about the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, do not let them rest. Then apply the rupture to that with a round-shaped cautery according to its size, so that it is removed from the joint as if it were the lower part of it; then treat that as we have said, without being adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And I have already mentioned some first points that say that the rupture should be treated with a triangular cautery according to this shape, because it is tested like this:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	A line is placed according to the width at the lateral part above the rupture point, and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery; the first cautery should be closer and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter forty-six.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the treatment of cauterization for torsion.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain persists in some limbs due to dislocation or impact, and if that pain continues for a long time without responding to medicine, then you should consider using a pointed cautery treatment.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And apply the cautery to all members according to their size and thickness, as well as their effectiveness and development, and the location of the torsion and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if the person recovers with the first cautery treatment, then it's fine; otherwise, repeat the process on them. Typically, for these pains, they puncture parts of the body close to the affected area, so that by having those points treated by cauterization within the patient, the body becomes healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter forty-seven.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the treatment of leprosy with cautery.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leprosy cases require treatment with cautery due to its great youthfulness, and moderately so if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you wish to cauterize that, consider whether the leprosy is contagious and if it can be cured with what we have said in the division of treatment, without spreading or affecting anything else, and you fear for the patient's entire body being affected by corruption reaching all parts of their body, then cauterize that area above the head: one at the middle of the head, and another slightly below; observe the forehead towards the ends of the hair; and both on two ears; and one behind, near the neck or nape.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And with your hand using the cautery tool slightly inside where it starts to affect the mouth, and if any previous symptoms are relieved from them; this will facilitate the expulsion of thick vapors from them. And cauterize on the wound according to what is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread throughout the body and is manifesting clearly, then you should apply these cautery treatments we have discussed for the head; perform cautery on the end of the nose, and two cauterizations on both eyebrows, and two on the two collarbones, and five around each rib cage; apply large ones near the navel, one on the shoulder blades, and two on the arms, with one over each ankle, and two on the knees, and one on each knee; and cauterize that area over all joints of those mentioned limbs and feet, and over every heel of his feet, and over all the spots on his body.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And watch out for the nerves that are on the sole, do not burn those areas.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some treatments involve applying a cautery to the sinus cavity over the mouth of the stomach and another on the throat.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more precisely you apply cautery, the more youthful and effective it becomes; and know that the body does not feel pain from cautery as it does with stings, because its system is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the size of the cautery should be large or small according to the limbs and joints, as dictated by the types of tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the cautery with ermine skin flour mixed with honey, and use another treatment until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter forty-eight.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the treatment of stupor with cautery.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is paralyzed or asleep and has been treated with medicines, plasters, yet it doesn't heal, then you should cauterize the paralyzed limb with cautery according to whether the member deserves large or small treatment based on its size or thickness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery penetrate a little into the elasticity of the skin.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with anoint until it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some cases involve cauterizing certain types of stupor that affect the limbs and feet, as well as the ribs and you can see the elasticity of the nerves that control that body part. The stupor is then relieved by this treatment.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume about it unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of nerves from the entire body's moving parts.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter forty-nine.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the treatment of white lesions that are caused by scorching.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When white lesions are old and do not respond to any of the medicines' ointments, then you should cauterize over that with a slight cautery according to the elasticity of the skin within. This will help remove the whiteness and change the color of the affected area, as well as alter its original color.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ermine and lentil flour mixed with pure oil, along with arnica leaves, or with鸽e's dung or yarrow, take one part from each and all are to be mixed. Spread the mixture on a piece of linen and place it over the affected area until it heals.
Capitol .l.	Chapter fifty.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the treatment of pimples with cautery.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When pustules begin to appear and you want them to stop growing, then apply a circular cautery over that area, as if revolving around it.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And it is said that the wound should be treated with a cautery placed in the middle location; however, I do not see this, fearing it might be an ulceration, as I have seen some occurrences like this before.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And the pus is drawn out that should be treated with a cautery in the circulation around like we have said, or with various types of cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Capitulum. (Translation: Chapter.)
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the treatment by cautery for boils.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some boils take longer to mature, and this happens due to excessive heat causing that issue or due to the patient's age, which is in decline with few ailments, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the boil; then apply a cautery around the boil, making small puncturing points; and place something soft there so it will facilitate maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	And if you want the perforation with a cautery, then you ignite the type of cautery like this: and place that in the middle of the boil where it can penetrate the chain.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you place the cautery in that location where you put it, because it brings relief to the arm's circulation; and then treat that area until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Capitulum. (Translation: Chapter.)
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the treatment by cautery for ulcers.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Ulcers are a spreading corruption in the limb, which destroys it as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	So if you find the ulcer in a place that needs cautery like fire, then ignite small pointed hot points of the cautery, and larger ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrosion occurs.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then apply cautery around it from all parts until you eradicate all corrosion and do not leave any cause for that.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then cover that area for three days, and place something on the treated spots with oil mixed until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption disappears.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with a meat ointment generating this.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	And if after three days the healthy flesh grows in the place where there is no corruption, it's good; but if not, then repeat the cautery over what is rotten in those corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And ulcers are treated with some times using acute medicine, which that is half in the place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, apply cautery like fire to lighter pus for a short time.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already mentioned the treatment with acute medicine in the division, so take that when you find it appropriate for you.
Capitol .liii.	Capitulum. (Translation: Chapter.)
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the treatment by cautery of joints and other similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Wounds are found on the parts of the diseased chest that are called joints, and this is a major cause, an entry point, which affects the chest; and applying cautery in these occurs according to two methods, one is with fire cautery and one is with hot water cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Apply fire cautery by igniting the point like a small torch, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the joint in all parts, and it should have thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then pause that ignition on the joint, and then move your hand with the cautery around the joint to allow the cautery to reach the depth of the joint.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Cover that area for three days until arm discharge begins.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then cover that area with bandages soaked in salt water, and leave the bandage on that until the infection is eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a healing meat ointment until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if they do not convert, and wounds occur on the surface of the body, especially in the breasts and feet, then you should perform cautery with water on those areas. Take a pipette or made of lead, or a small torch, place that over the joint; take some water in the pipette, and rotate your hand, while moving the pipette through compression of your hand from all directions, apply pressure to the edge of the pipette against the root of the joint, allowing the hot water vapor to reach the root of the joint; wait for an hour as the patient chokes on the hot water vapor, then remove that, where the joint with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do this for those and proceed to another area until you have covered all of their occurrences in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat those pus that come from the roots of joints with this type of ointment that produces new flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	Capitulum. (Translation: Chapter.)
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the treatment by cautery for shaking or trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a certain shaking due to rubbing in the nerves or because of fever causing rubbing, or due to other similar causes, then you should apply cautery with four cauteries or with one on each rib of the back, between each rib with a single cautery; and on the feet, and above the stomach of the patient, do an olive-shaped cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of the patient subsides, hastening the recovery from the illness with rubbing.
Capitol .lv.	Capitulum. (Translation: Chapter.)
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the treatment by cautery for various accidents in the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body are found white sores and their pus cavities made of thickly corrupted matter; therefore it begins at the start when it appears, it must be treated by cautery over all the tip of the fistula with a small pointed rod for murt's firewood; or with an iron rod long as an herb; or with a slow-lentil cauterizing instrument.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes some inflammations are to be treated by cautery during the process of expulsion according to this manner; they are not burns, and they are bursted out by reducing excesses in those, it heals them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, if this is to be done for the purpose of evacuation with bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.	Head 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Regarding the treatment by cautery for infections leading to a lesion through the insertion of an arrow.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Treat inflammations due to arrow infections that require cutting of the wound which should be drained, or make a pustule incision or perform a cautery on the member, then apply, and it's difficult to leave that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	And when it happens to you in any way, touch your hand to the opening of the arrow wound, and place your hand on that spot, apply the treatment for those inflammations inside where there is still pus from the infection, ensure it doesn't come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then place over the fire the olive cauterizing instruments of small and large size, for multiple numbers, and blow upon those into which there is a flame.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one small or large depending on the location and the wound where an artery has been ruptured, over that vein apply it briskly after you have healed as instructed, and perform a cautery inside so that it is separated and contained the infection.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you follow your instructions and remove the cautery, then take another cauterizing rod among those prepared in the fire, and therefore do not cease to perform this one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And remember not to burn the nerves here, and that it brings other mischief upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the bleeding in those, especially if the artery is large, unless one of four ways: or use this cauterizing method we have mentioned, or extraction when it cannot be removed, which when removed its ends are burned and the bleeding is stopped, or tie it with string or bandage through firm constriction, or apply them to medicine whose virtue is to restrict the bleeding; and they are strengthened with powder in a decent constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Only let him who administers decent constriction use bandages and tightness of cloths or due to causes of burning and appearance, not oppose it with heat.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If this needs to be done in another case and the doctor is not present or medicine is unavailable, then open according to that indication on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand into the patient a large constriction within where there is still excess from the predominant part of the wound, and above the arrow make that not bleed; and over the arrow apply with cold water rubbing until the bleeding stops and thickens; and let it be decided in what needs to be cauterized or if medicine is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Regarding cutting, puncturing, suction, bloodletting, wounds and their appearances.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are terms of Albuqirqui.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already discussed in the first chapter all illness where a fire cauterization is convenient and with burning medicine, and its occasions and causes, and the tools necessary for those, I've ordered the chapters of the hierarchy in the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so that the one who desires it can be alleviated on what has been requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I start this, child, learn that in this chapter we are dealing with the fear that was addressed in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason, I advise great caution because in the operation which is in this chapter there are many inflammations to be evacuated from where life is with the application of veins or incision on pustules or discharge or purification of wounds or extraction of arrows or incisions of cuts and their appearances.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And for all those, there are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the extreme case of them, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that do not let this fall upon you where there is uncertainty, for some inflammations require you to use methods of men against the methods of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them is one that goes with their illness and it is severe for you, they also die due to the severity of what they find in their sickness, and from this long-lasting illness, and fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among those is the one that gives you his strength and words, you hope for that health, and their illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not let it be that you agree with the one who comes to you like this; and your caution should be greater than greediness and your appetite; and do not presume any cause on this unless from certain knowledge which verifies what you need, and for which there is a sensible outcome.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	In the treatment of all your afflicted patients, consider their prognosis and choose the appropriate form for their recovery, where you are an aid in the acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh children, God listens to your understanding and does not give you direction or protection, for this is what He holds in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have organized this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to the chapter on cautery, of foot treatment, so that you may be comforted with what you are asking for and need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water which is contained in a child's head.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease, which is observed in children, begins during infancy and when the child grows stronger, their head swells.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some swellings due to a concealed cause which cannot be known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	May I have not seen this disease except in children; and for all those whom I saw were taken by death, therefore it is an evident work in those.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child whose head was full of water, the size of their head was always magnificated to such an extent that it could not contain itself due to the enormity of its head, and more than the humidity increased within that, resulting in death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture either is added between the membrane and the bone, or is added to the outside of the bone.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Where the operation is in that location if the moisture is between the membrane and the bone, and pus is little, then it is necessary to dig out where you make a cut across the middle of the head into the membrane, making a crack whose length goes two fingers deep into which the moisture flows, and this is the form of pus:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the moisture is more increased and the pus is larger, then here are two cracks according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is on the outside of the bone, a sign of it is that you open all the corners of the head and when you squeeze that with your hand towards the inside parts, water comes out rather than what you have concealed.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And it is necessary to dig into the middle of the head with three cracks according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And at the beginning extract all the moisture; and then strengthen the cracks with bandages and pillows; and on the fifth day apply oil above and inside, and loosen the sutures and treat the wound with herbs and ointments, and strengthen the head with an equal amount; and let the patient eat dried meat of little moisture until that member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And it is another way of incision, which you should consider based on the size of the pus pocket and the accumulation of water; some swellings are more in the back of the head, or at the front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore attend to where the pus pocket and the water collection appear, and do it as best suits you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and let the flow of blood and moisture exhaust the patient by that blood flow during evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On incision of the arteries which are near the earlobes, called warts.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there occur certain catarrhs or pains in the ears or on the feet and it is old, and you do not apply treatment with medicines to that, then the primary treatment in this case is an incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you want to incise where the patient raises their head, then rub that area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulsates; and the spots under those spots near the earlobes are compressed, and they do not occur in all men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then press on the artery with herb, and cut each of them along the edge of the sharp part at incision going into the bone, and do this across the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the edge of the cut near the artery and tie that at the points where they meet above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision goes two fingers adjusted, when any vein is cut blood stops at exhalation pulsating, which skips over to frequent jumps.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the artery does not appear in the center, then it is necessary that you measure from the earlobe the quantity of space three fingers, and press with herb, and cut inside the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what comes out of the blood is a quantity of water one part. And strengthen the patient if he sweats more or less, and all of this is according to the quantity that appears from the vigor of the patient and the fullness of his artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and if there remains above the bone any cause of the headache, then you cut that so as not to allow pus to form.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with pillows and with bandages of linen, and treat that with ointment until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old headache or inflammation occurs due to dampness and quality in the joints or from old inflammation resembling those, and is treated according to the methods of medical care, then for these diseases we have performed this extraction of the nerves in the joints, or cautery of those just as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises the skin which is in the joints; understand the nerve that appears in the joint area where it is according to its pole shown by its pulse, and is hidden even in few individuals due to the intensity of rubbing.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then the patient's back should be strengthened with some cloth; and then rub the area with a hard cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until you see the nerve clearly manifestly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now take this spatula of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you heat the chain under it until you reach the nerve; and then pour oil on them and extract that from the superficial parts into which you extract that of the chain and discover that of the tunics which are left behind, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, then wrap that at the tip of the index finger, and then dissect from that part according to the amount by which its ends are elongated and contracted, and not allow a flow of blood; for if they are not cut, it will not pump up the blood.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate some of the blood from the artery. Inside three times.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the nerve is large, then you should divide that into two places at each about double strength or with cords long, and do not cut it before the consolidation of the wound and allow a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut out the surplus which is between two ligaments; do this either in that moment or later.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, apply the cautery to it within the mouth with a cutting-type cautery until its ends are burned, and stay in place at that level of surgery.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to have the patient with fever or with chills rather than from coldness causing conditions; for cautery is caused by those factors that help in finishing dampness, so it is better in young people.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cut the extraction of nerves that you make at the old spot, they should be placed over your well-powdered skin and treated with dry medicines to make the flesh come out and within which it becomes healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you work another opening, it accidentally causes blood flow from the nerve, then you should control that blood flow, or with cautery, or you fill the spot where you are working, and strengthen your hand until you restrict the blood.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes are present for you at that time, then place your hand on the spot until the blood is congealed, and cover the area with water from intense cold until the pain rests, and strengthen according to what you do.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is the least in extracting nerves is that you apply the cautery to this particular one with two needles, because you have held both places with your thumbs, and then withdraw them while igniting, until they reach the mouth and dissect the vein into two places, so that it becomes elongated where its ends are, which are not consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the heat of both needles be simultaneous.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the two needles have sharp heat that is better, for if they are sharp like two needles close to each other, and do not cut through the flesh at speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Then because in those there is some thickness, the heat of the flame is concentrated in those and the flesh is cut gently.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this method is better for all operations and even more so for minor ones.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the spacing which is between the two needles be equal to the size of the thumb.
Capitol quart.	Quart (fourth) is a capstone, or conclusion. The text seems to have come to an end here.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment for chests affected by sharp and acidic tears from the nose.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acidic tears, and it is the chest affected by those veins which are on the forehead from the nose, you do not find any cause for medical treatment in this, and make the patient's face redder and feel a walk like that of ants on their forehead as if it were an ant walk, and their noses become exhausted, moistened so much that their skin is already known to them, and their eyelids are chapped due to the sharpness of the tears. The old ones apply remedies in this operation treatment, and they pass this treatment with patience.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And this is that you command the patient to scratch the skin which is on their forehead, and then cut into the forehead three slashes equally spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the cut is two thumbs: one cut should be equally spaced from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tear ducts which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And protect yourself from the beginning of the arteries which are in two sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if you need to measure the space at any incision, adjust it to the size of three fingers.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge or dry fabric, use them under what dries out the wound.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And insert the tip of two sharp points into the extremities, this is the shape of the incision for them:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which goes from one end through to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the chain between two incisions at the cheek which is above the jawbone, and then make this incision move into the second one.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then insert this tool and enter the first incision with another blade, one sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp end of this you must cut off the connected flesh and the chain, and the tip of him inside the jawbone, and insert that where it reaches to the middle incision, and cut all the veins that descend from the head to the stomach.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May this incision continue to the place where the chain appears, and then do this in the middle opening between the other opening.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when it pours out as much as the blood quantity, squeeze the places of the clotted blood sacks.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then rest at every old cut for a while, and place those powdery remains of meat in vinegar and oil and vinegar mixed, and wait until it does not develop pus.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day untie the bandage and apply large amounts of water or vinegar, then cure this with balm in oil rubbed and others so that the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	I am unable to accurately translate "Capitol .v." as it appears to contain a typographical error or abbreviation which makes its meaning unclear. Please provide more context or clarify what you mean by ".v."
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	About the treatment of coughs through catarrh and fluids descending from the parts inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When for some blood the catarrh has increased and continues, and sometimes expel stomach fluids from the patient, and already their observation is weakened, and their eyelids are ulcerated with their skin, and in front of the head there's an acute toothache and subsequent exacerbation, then understand these circumstances where the substances and catarrh do not go through veins but from spots inside the parts that proceed.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these is this: command the patient to rub their forehead, then make an incision in that spot on the middle of the forehead, a little larger than the width (and begin from the gap at the left temple into the right; and let the incision go through the jawbone; extend your hand along the length of the temples where they are swollen due to chewing), so that the jawbone is exposed inside.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or with dry fabric, then fill between the two lips of the incision with vinegar or with cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And afterwards strengthen it from above with powdery remains of meat in vinegar and oil, so that there does not develop pus.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you have removed it and several times that the pus has diminished, then cover the jawbone starting from his navel flesh, and afterwards treat that with desiccating regiments which make the flesh into a navel, as if you take of wheat flour two parts and of honey four parts and mix them, and from these prepare a plaster and apply it in this wounds of the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	I'm sorry but I can't provide the translation for "Capitol .vi." as there seems to be some missing context or specific details which are needed for an accurate interpretation. Please provide more information about its origin, purpose, or content so that it could be better understood and translated accurately.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	About the treatment of wax in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes of wax in the ears are one of four kinds, either it is mineral stone wax or something like wax, such as iron and lead, or it is plant matter such as thyme or broad bean, or it is fluid-like substance such as water and vinegar mixed together, or some kind of animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when stone wax is in the ear or another similar cause of those causes that do not adhere or grow within the ear, hang the ear in the sun. And if you notice the stone wax, then distill it with some oil that has been oxidized or made from sulfur, and then administer extraction of that, and make sneezing occur in a condition, and hold your nose when there is an occurrence of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then hang in the circuit of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and spread the ear to the parts above, where the spots have been opened against these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not open, then administer extraction of this using the tool called an epicicarian bistoury which has this shape:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is opened by the bistoury, it's fine; otherwise, then administer extraction of this with a thin lancet of bone that has been duplicated.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not opened by this, then make a reed canal and insert the end of the canal into the ear cavity and seal around the canal with beeswax and with softened oil so that only the canal is opened.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract from the ear canal in strong suction, where spots are pushed as we have described before.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not treated in this manner, then take some alum from a bag or some old clothes on which the ants have been caught in small quantities, place those near the end of the leg, and then properly cover that area with something suitable.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And insert that into the ear canal with ease, and then remove the moisture from the ear.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not cured of all the causes that we have described, then you should cut open what stands in front so that an abscess or cramp does not develop.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method for cutting it open is that at the beginning you touch the thigh of the phlebitic vein and extract the pus according to the manner of its nature, then make a cut between your hands and convert the ear towards the parts above, and make a small fissure in the ridge of the ear from which you remove his blood where it was pressed by him.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound is in the shape of the moon's figure where it reaches the skin, and if the skin is torn, keep that if you can with suitable instruments; and then quickly cover the wound at that time, and cure that inside so that it becomes healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause affecting the ear is one of the fats that grows and inflates, then administer treatment and extraction of it; but if you do not follow my advice, then take thin catgut suture according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer the excision of that fat which is stuck in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not perform this when you think that it is already moistened by the steam of the ear, and place this in small wadding, and then extract from these at the roots or with fine hooks, or using an incision as we have said, so that the extraction becomes easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	If the water that enters the ear comes to understand when the thigh uses sneezing at the beginning, and fills the inner ear with some old cloth, then place it over that ear in which there is water, and if this way is not cured, then well; but otherwise, then take small thin wadding and a lion according to their length as we said, and shape these into a ball slightly in the fire for a little while, and let the patient insert one of these into their thigh near their ear and place it on part of that cloth and hit it with another thin wadding over the wadding inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, don't stop this with wadding until all the water becomes cured.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water has become cured in such a way, then take paper or wax .and, And put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end into the fire so that the tip of it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And put another wax and do this as many times until all the water becomes cured, and extract it with a tube like that of the ear wax extractor as described above.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	If the cause entering that ear is small, like it and resembling it, cure it in this way as we said when dividing; but if it's a large thing causing an ailment inside the body cavity, then administer its extraction with hooks and forceps, and the reason of it is much lighter than all other causes that affect the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	If it's the extraction of worms that are produced in the ear, when you cure it with what we said in division and in the treatise on distillations, do not let your treatment affect, then cover yourself so that you look at the ear in sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if here appears any cause of the worms, then extract it with hooks or with fine forceps, but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is stretched and wide at this end, which is its form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the fine end into the ear according to how much can withstand the thigh; then suck through forceful suction, and do this as many times until all the worms become cured.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you do not follow my advice, then fill and seal in the tube circuit with wax as we said; then administer distillations that have already been boiled for worm treatment, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if your discharge is such that you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument whose form is like this:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or wood, stretch it out, so that there's a small hole, and have a flat surface above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And this is how you should make it such that when it's in the cavity of the tube here, wherever it might be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the rod and wrap it with some cloth on its lower end, then pour oil into the cavity of the ear canal, or juice from any herb, or whatever you choose among these medicines in the tube -- this one is in the ear --, then insert the rod with the cloth above it and press your hand on it so that when the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear canal, the thigh feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And whatever is put in the ear should already be heated slightly by fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And remember that the cause you are distilling in the ear should not be too hot, for the ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Regarding the cure for ear discharge.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children suffer from belly pains without causing perforation, and this happens in some adults as well; ear discharge in the ear canal due to an injury or due to nothing within that area; and this ear discharge sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear tube where it doesn't connect with the outer eardrum, and sometimes it occurs outside those parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens at the entrance of them, where it doesn't connect with the outer eardrum, is in older people's dispositions which have difficulty in healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that case where you can access the outer membrane, be sure to hold the ear canal of the patient towards the sun and look into it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you notice an obvious discharge, open that with a subtle instrument such as this one:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it where its width is small, and one part is sharp while the other isn't; and the instrument be of two sides like a lion's head so that it doesn't damage the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the discharge is due to soft flesh within the ear or in its canal, then use that with delicate forceps and penetrate deeply into it until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the discharge is at the entrance of the ear, then take a fine lion's claw and heat it slightly over fire for a moment, and then place it into the canal of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you have felt a blockage with this instrument that is causing discomfort to the patient due to ear pressure, relieve the obstruction with ease; and remember not to injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cover the ear with a cloth according to the amount of the opening of the canal which you have surrounded with Egyptian oil; and do this for several days until you are sure that the infection is healing; or take some and immerse it in water, crush it finely, apply it on that spot, using it. And if you notice that the ear has healed, then clean out whatever is left and replace it with another which you cover in cloth soaked in roasting oil, until the pustule crust falls off; and continue to treat it until it is cured.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	And if there is a pus-like discharge, then immerse the sponge or cloth in hot water and apply it to the ear, and use another treatment that restricts the pus discharge, which is mentioned in the distillation treatise.
Capitol .viii.	Section VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Regarding the treatment of adenoids that affect the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Adenoids that occur in the eyelids of the babies sometimes are moist, some times they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then clean those with thimbles or forceps, and divide those with fine pincers from their roots, and then apply crushed herbs on the areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	And if there is pain with pus discharge, then you use a cautery to treat those with a fine pituitary cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is near the incisions and the pus discharges return when there remains any cause in their roots; and when they are treated with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Section IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for granulomas that occur on the eyelids of babies.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Swelling occurrences on the eyelids of babies is caused by some reason which accumulates into large size in its firmness and hardness; for this large size, it's called granuloma.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And the addition of thick moisture on the eyelid leaves and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Then the operation here is that you should consider if the large size is proceeding within it from under the eyelid and is swollen to all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then cut across it with width, and then push out that from all sides with ease until it drains, and then lift it up with forceps and remove it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if you are not able to see the beginning of it if it's not pus that penetrates under the eyelid in small increments, then this is noted as not having any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the appearance is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and treat that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if there's little of it, it won't harm for the area where the oil heals that and causes it to re-grow.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the large size is declining within the parts inside the eyelid you remove its surface inside, then lift that eyelid and hold the large size with forceps or another one you use for beginning, press it from all sides, and if the eyelid under the incision is elongated, this won't have any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And near the opening, wash the wound with salty water; and treat the area with what causes growth until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Section X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Regarding the treatment of excoriation on the eyelid above the baby's eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Excoriation is grayish matter which is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and mostly occurs in babies, worsens their eyesight leading to catarrh for them; and they cannot see the brightness of the sunlight because their tears accumulate on those.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you must constantly speak to them about their faces and also sleep with them facing up; and on their eyelids you should keep the wet brows, which are already covered in swelling, and the apparent possibility of narrowing is seen in this state; and when you press a place with your fingers, you sense narrowing inside those areas.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is a certain way to perform an operation in that case where the patient rests their head on your knee, and then they rest a cloth over you and you make the incision. You draw a circle according to the amount of pus from all parts, and then press that one upon this other for all with your fingers so that the narrowing is added in the middle of the circle, and in the middle of this moisture there is an opening perpendicular to the crack based on the width, and the crack should not be larger than the incision made in tubal ligation.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	May it be in the preparation that you cut through the artery completely until you reach the narrowing, and after this process you may remove pus by incision according to the form of white grease.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	So, extract those on the sheets which you have enveloped between your fingers at the sides forward and mix with the right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And remember not to squeeze in the crack for fear that moisture may not enter the nostrils and remove that.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	May it not be that your pus appears at the beginning of the crack, but when you do squeeze in the crack a small moist cloth so that pus can be processed; and then extract that as we said before; and add wet cloths with oil and vinegar on top of the area and strengthen those with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And in such a way that they sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the crack so that what is left from that moisture can be eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	May it happen that pus forms at the site of a boil, then treat it with plaster until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the methods for examining the nose.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the nose you find natural hairs that are tight, and when they grow old, then these noses affect the nose leading to symptoms such as frequent tears and inflammation of the eyelids and skin underneath, which is the cause of destruction of the nose called rhinitis. The treatment is done through four ways: or with a cauterization by fire; or with acute medicine as mentioned in the chapter on cauterizations; or it can be treated with resection and suturing; or through tubes according to what I say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore dig that you place the tip of the nose in your knee; then convert the eyelid of the nostril to your left hand, and if it is converted, it's good; and if not, insert a needle into the one where pus is secreted from the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the surface, and that - near the margin of the eyelid in which hair grows - next to the hairs, pull the thread upwards over the eyelid, and then convert it back.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then make an incision in the corner of the eyelid so that you can adjust the hairs to lie perpendicular to the major lacrimal gland towards the lacrimal duct; and then remove the thread and place some petticoat or cloth powder on the eyelid, and press over the eyelid like a mirena leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	So it may be that the shape depends on the amount of elevation of the eyelid, which varies in humans and those who have had their eyelids excised with a large quantity according to the degree by which the eyelid becomes swollen.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then make a cut over the two lines that you marked, starting from the major lacrimal gland towards the minor lacrimal duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural hairs such as that of the thickness of a king's beard.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then insert the needle in one of the two corners of the artery, and then scrape that area completely, and then adjust according to the incision on both lips towards the tongue or thread hole of fine wool, remove the pus, and have what is superfluous from the threads adhere under two eyebrows for certain causes of swelling, if you want to do this, otherwise don't treat it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then let the stitches from the threads rest for three or four days, and treat that afterwards.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, let the wound rest after its stitches, and treat that with what dries and constricts, which requires elevating the eyelid and sealing the wound as well; however, stitches are preferred. So it is also advisable to follow the ancient rhinitis treatments.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	So if you are concerned about the nose in him, it is good operation and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way to observe, and it consists of pressing the eyelid like a thyme leaf, and then lifting the eyelid with three fingers spread out according to this shape:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if it is not possible this way, use your fingers, and this does not match the equalization, then take a needle with thread in which there is thread, and place that in the middle of the figure, and insert another needle next to the major lacrimal gland, and the other needle according to the minor lacrimal duct, adjust between your fingers the needles for equality, and raise your hand as much as equal elevation, lift the entire artery like we have described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound for sewing, and treat that inside which is healable.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you happen to encounter an abscess, you should start with your incision or your wound, but treat that abscess with dressings and make it resemble the wound, and apply ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes there are inflammations under the eyelid that cause their hair to fall out, then take care that you apply what we have advised for incisions; more sewing in some areas is more natural.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Here is how one should treat cuts on the hand:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you should convert the eyelid and divide its figure inside according to what I have recounted; then, make two cuts or two fine needles of which length is according to the length of the eyelid and width resembles that of the mouth.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already cut at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And add something fine underneath whatever excess is of the eyelid's edge, and tighten the threads of each part firmly, then smooth that for a few days; so that through the constriction, it dies and becomes rejected and falls out when it heals on itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it has taken longer, then break the stitches at the thorns, and treat that inside which is healable.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then when it has hardened, the eyelid is raised and the hair does not hurt.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is how one should make two needles according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	Make the quantity of length and width neither too much nor too little.
Capitol .xii.	Title XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the removal of painful hairs in the chest when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hair is unnatural, hard and prickly, in your chest then the operation is that you take something fine, place it on that smooth spot of this fine thread, and adjust its extremities so that each one rests with a subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be as long as your palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then tie another fine thread around this quickly, and adjust its extremities if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head in your direction, and close to the sun so that your work is recognized, as it is a subtle and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs a needle, and make it penetrate into the eyelid smoothly so that you remove it above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair upwards and insert that into fixation, and let the hairs be one or two or three and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand into that where the hair is out of place in fixation on the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it has been out of place and the hair is not stuck, pull it out of place to the parts left with this thread that you have made for this purpose, where in there will be hair that comes up above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And remove that with the vision of your chest, so that then you will pull it out of place and the thread, and shave whatever hair and clean your chest, and let the wound heal for two or three days, where the hair adheres to its place and grows above that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter than natural, then adjust one long hair of the natural hairs, and lift it up towards that, or leave it so that it grows almost in space, and then lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	Title XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of raising which occurs above the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it appears in your chest as raising, and when the eyelid contracts as it is tightened at its corners or to the right or left side, due to poor healing of wounds or sections or cauterizations, this is called leporine. This raising is either natural or accidental and occurs due to poor healing of wounds or sections or cauterizations, or due to their ill-treatment.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation is that you cut that consolidation and separate its edges from it, and place on it in what is between those a piece of linen cloth, and sew those once they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not cover that you use of healing from the causes which dry up, constricting; so if you do this, it will return to raising worse than at any other time.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for these causes that mollify thus such as fennel, steep it in water where its pieces are high and of that cloth, or apply almond oil, which is made liquid with some of the oils, then immerse the cloth in this, and treat with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your healing is that you puncture through all that is not consolidated according to the shape I outlined at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have mentioned is merely some correction of raising that does not return the shape of the area according to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Title XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of raising which occurs on the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This raising which occurs on the eyelid, called vertidian raising; it is either natural or accidental in your chest.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Accidental injuries can be caused by wounds, cuts, burn marks, or other similar incidents.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way to perform an operation on the patient is: take a needle with two holes and place it in the flesh. Make it pass from the left lacrimal point into the right lacrimal point, so that the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh towards the parts above where the needle is and hold that part with the needle, and make an incision with a broad blade.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And thus if you return the eyelid according to its shape, it is right; and otherwise, take the edge and place that in the cut shape, then convert the eyelid through that, make both cuts at the end of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of those two cuts at the corners of your incision, which you made between them, be formed by making an angle there so that when they come together, it forms their figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: the lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then remove that part of the flesh as much as is the width of your patient's blunt end, so as to free the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the separated parts and stitch those with the thread of wool; then treat those with what we have said about moisturizing medicines and in which they should be healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if it is a rupture due to a cut or stitches or a burn, then you must make a straight incision on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been said beforehand.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate with the paste between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the whole discussion of treating a rupture whether it's above or below, let it flow in your operation according to how it is prepared like a rupture, and that form is like a mixture of various shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And throughout the ages, skilled craftsmen prepare various means into which they can return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and that patient according to what suits them for the operation and tools in their best positions.
Capitol .xv.	Title: XV
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Regarding the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this kind of consolidation occurs in old men, it is necessary to strengthen the eyelid more above on top of the white part of the eye. It hinders its natural movements and functions, so you should insert the edge of your finger under the eyelid, or elevate that part with your hand, or stretch that towards the nose.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then, you should make a subtle incision for the adhesion to an incision that isn't at the sharpness of the cuts, having it blunt enough so that the patient doesn't get anxious about the operation. Keep the incision intact so that it doesn't damage the eye's sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision carefully remove that adhesion in a way that the eyelid returns to its natural form and allows healing of the entire adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then, put in the eye saltwater which you will wash with; or distill it from junia dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with paste, place wool soaked in an egg's yolk over the eye, and for several days use causes that promote consolidation until it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	Title: XVI
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Regarding the incision of the eyelashes and the prominence of flesh on the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You should know that the eyelash can be in two ways; one is nervously, which resembles a hard, subtle chip; or it's non-nervous, similar to white mucus congealed. When you touch it, if it is forced to catch onto the corner of your mouth, it is removed and the corner is not stuck inside.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	Both types do not start only from the major tear duct, gradually covering vision and preventing light and eye movements.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way to act in making the incision is that the patient should hold their head in the place they are accustomed to, then open their eyes, raise the eyelid with your hand, and carefully grasp the eyelash at the corner of their nose and stretch it towards the corners.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert a horse's hair or cow's hide or calf skin piece or something similar or an animal horn, or gradually double the end of the needle and place it in the middle of the eyelash. Penetrate that with the needle and tie it to a nail; then stretch it towards the corners, scrape off the back part of the eyelash which reveals the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And similarly follow that with hair inside its root.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then, you should make the remaining cut along the root of the tear duct with a subtle incision or little V-shaped cuts, and remove the natural flesh around that way that an incision like this would not cause continuous weeping.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And occasionally the eyelash extends to the corner or nail, as we have said, and similarly, it is scraped with the V-shaped incision which has this form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And remember that when making the incision, do not touch the corneal membrane and ensure there is no tear in it, and that the pupil is not poked.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	The incision is made with a little salt water or cold water made from vinegar, and leaves that inside for another day; then treats that as what we have said so it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the thumb is not nerve-racked and you cannot insert the needle, nor pierces it in that spot on the wrist, then by using this special type of thumb with medicinal treatments, it is cured just like what I have described and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to sever that, then open the space between the patient's thighs and take a subtle sharpened needle according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you notice that it has been weakened and mixed with sand and is taken in that amount, then distill from your mouth into the thigh area prepared for surgery or over the knee joint or with salted oil, and pour the thigh inside on the other day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And proceed with the operation inside until all that is yours has been removed, otherwise let pus come out through the incision, so when you have finished, then care for the pus until it has healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And continue with your operation on that according to reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The eyelid's inflammation, if it appears in the area due to major injury, should be stopped at that spot; and you cut a portion of that, but do not finish your incision lest you cut the tear ducts.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And continue to drain through the eye joint with sharp scissors until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On making incisions for gout and what is born of adjusted flesh in the thigh area.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some gout appears in the thighs of some individuals where adjusted flesh is born and it covers the pupil, or presses towards or strengthens against the eyelids. And these forces the eyelids together with parts offstage to meet at the edge of the eyebrow.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation here is that the thigh places its head in its place and you open those areas of the thigh and collect all that flesh with convenient needles, and cut that with forceps or tongs. And proceed to cut the flesh beginning until everything is finished with the scissor, and keep control over the area so that it does not bleed out; this is your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be like the one where you cut those or with that point which we have recommended in cutting the thumb, or with small scissors which you collect with force when it comes to the form of your head close to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And when your incision is complete and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the area with salted water or distill over it with a powdered saline substance similar to what you find in corrosive medicines, and place over the area offstage an albumen paste from egg so that pus may be prevented from coming out.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause for gout and it becomes severe with pus, and you fear pus, then cover the area and treat that pus with water that will soften that pus, and proceed with this operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjusted flesh which occurs in the thigh of this type.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But you should let the healing of the thigh area take place naturally or through an accident, operate with iron, and do not put your hand into any of these operations while that part is suffering from this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On collecting wax in the thigh area.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Wax is made from veins of a saline nature which are stubborn in the thigh area and prevent it from undergoing operations, so you soften this area over days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the thigh where wax exists is strong and in it there is no other illness except wax, then you collect that wax.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the thigh to place its head in its place and hang those veins with one needle or two according to your discretion; let that needle be of subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or make it two needles gradually in a single body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And let those veins be collected with subtle forceps, with subtlety, and remove the pus bit by bit, while you notice that these veins are being removed from the thigh and turned.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And remember not to lead the thigh towards the extremities of the needle; and if your operation is in mid-morning facing the sun, ensure that you are firm with your operation so as not to cut any other veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then you drain the thigh with a green or saline cleft for its sharpness to dissolve what has been removed from the wax.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible for you to collect all in that hour, then cover the whole area with what softens your pain, and leave it offstage for some days until your pain is subdued and prevent pus from coming out.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And proceed with this according to the mother's method until you are healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is how the scissors look:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On reducing swellings to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat swellings with cauterization or with sharp burning medicine as described in the narrative of it and it is not healed, then there's no option but to make incisions over the pus, so that you can extract all the moisture which is inside it, and let water drain when it has been revealed that the nose appears.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And so when the hole is found and sometimes in their body there's corruption or blackness, then you should have a tool whose shape is this:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It has a sharp head, and it's made of iron, and its tip is rounded like an iron tool sharpened by the abrasion of a saw or finely ground (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place that one over the corrupted area of the wound, and then rotate it with your fingers, gently pressing your hand in until you know that the corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And make some cuts there, and then restore the area damaged by drying and constriction.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the place is consolidated and it's in your patient's good flesh, and if the body of the disease has been removed and cleansed for forty days without being renewed or oozing, and no accident happens to them, then you know that they are healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it's not in the uterus but to reduce the crack to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and you will open from the second bone or with acute medicine, once the hole is found, then you take tribulation according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The extremity of the iron should be triangular, and the stem of it is gradually narrowed inside the extremity as shown.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place that one over the bone, and let it be close to the lacrimal; extend your hand a little more than your breath, and then rotate your hand around the tribulation until it penetrates the whole bone, and that feels for the patient when you find its exit point with your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	And then restore the area with styptic medicines, drying it as you would with your sweat.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	And when the flesh and the place are endured, then the substance that flows out to the far parts returns to the nose, so this is pus more lightly on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On reducing the prominence of the bone.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the bone juts out completely and does not cause damage or diminution, then let the patient lie down, and then proceed to make incisions around their neck in the scarification area with proper incision; then place your hand on top of the bone with liniment made from garlic and aloe vera and egg whites, and then strengthen the plaster on the bone with powdered substances.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method for powders is to take linen cloths of powdered substances, and each cloth should be divided into four pieces; then make these from the powders.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one on top of the other according to the amount needed by the bone.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then reinforce over those with stiff linen cloth; and repeat the application of the incisions with wet powders; and then leave the poultices on for one day and one night, and smooth out the bone while it's strengthened.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	May this also when the ligament is softened, then let it be straightly stretched.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And leave the ligament stretched throughout the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone has already been reduced, well done, and if not, then continue applying plaster with powders and stiffness, along with the poultices, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On incising into the prominence of the uveal layer.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the uveal layer, and it's prominent projecting out from the eyelids like a small rash, and the shape is made in the form of a human being by this means, wanting to incise into it, then when performing the operation on this, as we have instructed, you should insert the needle at the edge of the uveal layer in the part left behind in the part above, and then insert another needle with double thread from the part near the lacrimal point, and make that penetrate while smoothing out the first needle according to its position; and then incise into the double filament and lift off that part of the uveal layer along the circuit of the needle, reinforcing that.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place wool infused with hen's egg white on top of the bone, smoothing it in between where the thread falls to the eyeball.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the bone with this so that it reinforces that until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And make some cuts around the entire area inside the bone circle near the bone prominence, and then puncture with a thin needle that reaches the root of the bone, allowing moisture to flow in an almond-like shape, and allow the bone to descend and come back into place.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of cataracts.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This ailment called cataract is not so much a disease that accumulates in the bone like water dripping, but it's not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of acting on it is to have the patient lie with their head elevated above both shoulders and to hold their hand in such a way that they can see where the disease reaches the parts left, then dry it without letting it descend and maintain light, and the patient sees these causes as before.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it doesn't descend to the bottom, you know that it's water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if it's not prepared for the descent of the disease as we have said, then make the patient lie between your hands and take a thin needle and do that over the eyelid in such a way that you cut slightly at the continuation of the conjunctiva against the uveal layer (into the place desired), so that the disease is removed.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	When it is outside, then you distill the sweat from the body by pouring water over it into which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And treat the other causes within that make for health.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of the water descending from sweat.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already discussed the types of water in the division and which is suitable to use when speaking of perforation, then this one according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then cover the patient's thighs with your hands on a mat and lay their sweat down evenly, using strict pressure.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your right hand near the edge of the patient's sweat, if the sweat contains water it is the left sweat; or with your right hand, if the sweat is on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And place your left hand with you if the sweat is on the left side; or with your right hand, if the sweat is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the tip of the applicator near the crown for the pregnancy of the eye by the swelling of the sweat in the area of the lacrimal duct, and then apply pressure on the applicator from there while turning your hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And penetrate into the sweat's fluid, you will feel that the applicator has already reached due to the view.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Cover so that the length of the applicator's path until it reaches the pupil is about the distance from the edge of the darkness to the tip of the sweat, which is the crown of the sweat; you will see at that pupil by the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And place the applicator in the area where there is water, and gently pull it down a few times, then if the water begins to descend immediately, then you will see the patient's eyesight returning shortly, with the applicator under their sweat.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And take a short break; if the water has descended, then you should stop this process before the applicator gets wet again.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is stuck and does not descend, then you remove the applicator easily, turning your hand gradually, and dissolve a small piece of clear gemstone salt in water; then use that lather inside the sweat. And remove or stop the sweat with wool infused in pressed oil and albumen, using this on their sweat.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Let us not be like those of our time who simply dabbed with the albumen of egg.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if your applicator does not enter into the sweat due to its hardness - which is characteristic of some individuals for whom their sweat is hard - then cover that you take the spatula, which is named almond, whose shape is as follows:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then puncture that area with the spatula, do not end your hand on the root, but make a path leading to the tip of the applicator.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And take care when moving the applicator as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And complete your work, prepare the patient to sleep in a well-prepared bedroom where they lie on their back under dim lighting, and forbid all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of this water so that its essence is preserved, and do not let their head touch either the right or left side completely.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let them lie according to their usual position on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And cover them in this dimness and let their eyes see some causes, then return them to their usual position on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not cover that you perform this during the time of treatments or just after infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	When covering, ensure that water can slightly leak out due to its large and intense flow.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If an abscess occurs after cautery, then cover that you remove the sweat before the seventh day, and correct that which yields pus.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you completely see the patient's vision and pause over their oral cavity through which their breath is regulated for several days, existing in this dim room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And take care to gradually adapt to that dimness and discuss about his causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that inside the alpaca, the disciple's vision is not completely restored after a few times, so you must be thorough with your operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have reached the extent of some of those among them who are in Artaq, and some say that you should make fire with almond that has been perforated inside which water is poured.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen this perfectly working water anywhere in our land nor is it found in some of the ancient books; and this water might be new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of almond species to place on those for which someone is unaware of them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or properly of steel, and let their extremities be in this triangular subtlety, the sharp end also like that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of meat injury in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are various buried meats that cause an ailment which is assembled with the sign of a heavy body's disease, or with a lesion on the land; this illness is called polypus because it resembles that land represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from them their flesh becomes inflamed, reddened, of a dark color; and from them it is said that their flesh resembles lion skin not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	And in that which is among these lion skin-like and not deceitful or cancerous, you should have the patient lie between your hands and place them under the sun. Also expose their nostrils and pierce them on those parts of the flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then remove that which is far out from the parts, and carefully cut what you have understood from those at a sharp, fine point between one part so that you know that all the flesh has been done; if there's any reason for removing it that's possible in such cases, then use this among the finer tools to make incisions so that it may come out of him for some cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the patient has an infection or gangrene that requires a cautery, then you should pause on him; or if it's about malign wounds, then you should cut and cauterize where the removal of the infection is possible, ensuring all the canals are done.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And from that place in the nose near the incision add water or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose has been opened and there is moisture inside the palate from it, then you know that it has already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If moisture does not penetrate as you observe, then you know that inside him is no flesh where the pus is in the parts that have not been reached by incision.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	And then you should cut into the belly of him where there is any lumpiness, and rest in his fat, pausing between each nut so that you can measure the amount as needed or monthly, and have the patient lie down with one end of the tool on the nose at a ray or for some other reason which could be possible for him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And once this has been done, let its smell spread so that it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and place yourself above his pillow, as the children who play in the streets often do when they want to perform actions like this, and it's a minor reason for those who wish to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two ends of the tool, one that goes over the nose and the other that comes out into the nose, and place bandages on the bones in the fat around the nuts in the tool. Do this so that you know the flesh is already around the nuts of the fat.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the fat, pause in the nose near the extraction of the pus with a spoon. Do this for three days or more until all that is rotten from the flesh has corroded.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And in the end of the cause, pause with a lead catheter in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you are performing a treatment that requires drying, use this method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is how the tool for nose purger works: it distills oils and medicines in the nostrils.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do this from silver or amber, which is similar to a small opened lantern, like a little cup, and the mouth similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tube of the nose purger tool is flat, open; on which there should be a handle at the back end of him, by which you hold it when you pour in oil or whatever you want from liquids and substances that can be sucked.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this nose purger costs: mix of beaver fat, white wax, ginger, cod liver oil, long pepper, snail mucus, and powdered cinnamon. And you should mix with milk and flour, make them into pills, and take one pill in warm water, then place it inside the patient's nostrils facing upwards.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About nosebleeds in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Causes mentioned are a nosebleed in the extremities of the nose, it is magnified and ointed for several days until the illness can be observed.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should cut into that at the beginning of his appearance, and eradicate all of that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then pause on the place or cautery or burning medicine which is where he was.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the incision is delayed until it's magnified, then consider if it's lumpy, hard, of dark color and with little feeling; in that case don't touch this malignant pus with iron which is a boil; these causes suggest you should cut out this boil for its great evil over him.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the boil feels like a lion and isn't of dark color, and incision is possible everywhere in that area, then evacuate the patient and cut those signs without fear, and treat the place with things that dry out so it can be healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	About sewing the nose, the lips, and the earlobe when continuity is dissolved by disease or similarities.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You should know that when there's a loss of continuity in one of these cartilages, you don't perform the operation much, but rather some people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you notice some cause of those, consider if there's a fresh disease in his flesh, then adjust the two lips of the sore with stitches, and then treat that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the solution's continuity lips are already separated, and every part is formed healthily, then you should scrape each part of their external body where pain may emerge.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the two lips with stitches and strengthen those, then on those sprinkle dragon's powder and wrap it in a bandage, put a small amount of plaster diafinicon or another stabilizing plaster over the powder, and smooth that lixiviation for two days or three, then remove that and replace that plaster, smoothing that internally so that they can be separated naturally, and cure with ointment until it heals.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of the stitch involves adding the solution for continuity or with needles as we have instructed in the stomach suture, or add the solution for continuity with the skin and let you know how to do it.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Regarding the removal of those causes that appear in the two lips in each part internally.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Swelling observed in men in each part inside their lips are like lumps that resemble fat from the buttocks, and some of them are smaller, while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	So you should convert the lips and each opening of those hard areas in every part, then place the surgical incision inside with a bandage where pain is relieved, and wash it with warm water and treat the area with something that has an antiseptic effect until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Regarding the incision of the flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	The appearance of swellings on the gum that the old called milk, then you should suspend that with a string or whatever you have to support it at the gums and make an incision there for its release, and smooth so that the healthy blood flows or allows pain.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And place a bandage over the area with a bandage or other收敛ing powders or decongestants.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, so that the cauterization will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Regarding the reason for teeth in iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of teeth in each part internally and those at the front, and between the gums, there are sharp, hard swellings that sometimes appear black or yellow, causing decay inside, leading to teeth decay.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	So you should separate the patient's thighs and place your hand on their stomach, and rub their teeth with sand where these swellings appear along with such causes, ensuring no harm results from it. Do this regarding blackness, yellowing, and other changes until they are altered.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if that is the case with those in digestion of food, good; and if not, then you repeat the digestion on those to another day and the second and third until it reaches the final statement where you want it.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth require various forms of reorganization and figures according to how your operation is prepared.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And to know which razors are for when the tooth is readjusted from each part internally is different than those with which it is shaved between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors must be prepared by you, which you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Regarding the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	So you should cure the tooth of its pain with all remedies and proceed with total extraction of it, noting that there is no reason to replace the swelling when it's extracted, as it is a substance subjected to sublimation leading to its removal during its extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the patient is convinced that the tooth needs to be extracted, you must firmly certify which tooth is causing pain, as swellings and pain subside when it falls off a healthy tooth. You extract that tooth and ensure that the pain does not continue until the diseased tooth with pain has been removed, which we have already seen through operations on other teeth.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then how you must be certified which is the painful tooth, and that you know well, so you should scrape in the circuit of the tooth at the gum where there is some soreness, ensuring it dissolves from the tooth-gum throughout, and gradually remove that with your knives or fine saws starting from the smallest part until that conforms.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And after that, use strong cuts with large force or an explosive cut, place the hand of the patient firmly so that you do not lose balance and ensure it does not hurt them too much, then pull out the tooth according to rectitude in a way that doesn't tear it, nor causes severe pain on the side.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it's not rootless, then take one of those instruments, and put that in front of you from every part with ease and make the removal as done when starting.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	And if the tooth is broken or corroded, then you should cover that break with a strip and tightly bind it at the tip of a thin rod to prevent it from breaking during your constriction over it with fingers.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should make an exquisite incision in the circuit of the gum all around and maintain your strength so that it doesn't tear and break off part of it, then return to the patient making sure their pain is greater than the initial pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be cautious that you do not do what the ignorant barber-surgeons do in their rashness and lack of knowledge about eradication, for they do not administer what we have prescribed; many severe illnesses arise from this, which are harder to cure than gallstones, and all their remedies or some of them, or what they extract from those stones as we have testified, brought by gallbladder motas.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the eradication of his illness is washed out in one's mouth with vinegar or salt added to it.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is bleeding due to stomach issues, like gallstones causing bleeding, then take some vinegar and apply it over the wound; if that vinegar does not cure, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and subtle tongs used for teeth extraction is long at the outer end, narrow in the middle, and thick at the bottom, so that they don't bend when you work with those.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And may they be as thick in the middle as times of a narrow handle, so that when you use them they don't bend, but are long at the outer ends.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And let them be made of Indian iron and straight at the ends, with teeth on their outer ends that interlock when one goes inside the other due to constriction from below, causing strength. Some of their outer ends resemble the bill of a stork, which is named ciconia, so they are strong, and they have robust construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On tooth extraction and the removal of stones from the jawbones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is stuck in the jawbone due to some reason, then dig until your hand becomes soft over the area between one or two days while the spot becomes softened; afterwards insert or apply forceps which are assembled like the bill of a stork called ciconia or guanta, the shape of forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them should be made just like a rasp or an almond.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not follow this with these forceps or tongs, then dig into the root and scrape all the flesh out, then insert the tool which is called an awl; it is a small lever whose shape is like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And may have a short outer end with a slight thickness at one end, and should not be bent so that it doesn't get stuck.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the root is extracted due to this reason, it's good; and otherwise, help yourself with these other tools whose forms are as follows: the shape of the first tool is triangular at the outer end with a slight thickness in that area.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second tool is that it should be triangular and even more subtle at the outer end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already with this tool you have two slopes, as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other tools which precede in the process of tooth scraping; when it's young you use this tool similar to an ox, and this is its shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the triangular bent or short outer end, which has a slight thickness, and should not be bent so that it doesn't get stuck.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And know that the tools for the tooth stones are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the artisan be wise and subtle in his craft, finding for himself according to what this operation means and the various illnesses; among these illnesses are those that the ancients neither described nor used specific instruments for, due to their diverse shapes.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	May it be that the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is broken, or if you apply pressure, then place your weight on that in its spot according to what suits him with the tools and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth stones, and help yourself with this lever whose shape is like this:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let it be slightly thick here gradually, and tighten or hold it in the mouth so that it doesn't escape or hide until all the bone is extracted; then restore the area with suitable medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May it be that there is a small inflammation in the bone, then treat that along with its darkness, and heal it inside until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth above others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent not according to their natural course, especially when they protrude in women, and particularly in older venerable ones; therefore consider: if the tooth is very close to another tooth, and it's impossible for extraction or medication of this one, then that tooth is implanted. However, if it's not attached to another tooth, then you have to cut out that one with this tool whose shape is as follows; it resembles a hog's snout, made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp outer end.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be on the part where you will cut out that tooth over many days because of the hardness of the tooth, and do not resemble any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is an exposed prominent tooth that can be filed, then file that with an Indian iron file as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it is all made of Indian iron; it has a smooth surface. And use points like a file on which are fixed needles through which the tooth is gradually filed in soft days, so that there is no other tooth similar and breaks off.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then draw that one on the belly, and cut that with a small razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth where a part has been extracted and you cut the tongue, then prepare to grind that inside which the sharpness of that fraction should be reduced and leveled, and fill it up so that the tongue does not hurt and the word does not become corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On restoring teeth with gold or silver in the mouth.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens to the teeth in front of concussion and removal by impact or impact, and the patient cannot strengthen on what eats, and you have treated that with stiptic medicines, and your treatment has not worked, then if it does not heal when using gold rather than silver in the mouth, because silver turns green and is left for several days, but no time should be spent changing to gold.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the tooth should be of such subtlety and coarseness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; as for the shape of the filling, take the tooth and place twice its length between two healthy teeth, and so grow the two bends of the filling between two bad ones, or if it's one or several, so that the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the process into the part from which you began, strengthen your hand with ease and wisdom so that it does not become bad.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And when you apply the stick to which you will strengthen the tooth, make sure not to scratch the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then remove the excess tips of the filling with forceps or scrape them off, and add those to every part during gestures, and turn those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the bad tooth, so as not to cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then flatten that stretched out like a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is slipped or broken, strengthen that or those with another tooth in such a manner throughout its time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of repairing two healthy teeth and two bad ones, thus as these are bound:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done to return one tooth or two in the vicinity of any of those places, and they grow back as we have described, and that grows.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not let this be done except by good artisans and wise people.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is suitable to use a cause of cow bones, and it is made like the form of a tooth from them, and placed in the location where the tooth fails, and strengthened in this way as we have said, and remains and serves there for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the inscription of the tongue that enters the tongue and inhibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which leaves the tongue to you in some cases or is natural on which one is born, or accidental and happens due to an injury that has already been consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on you is that you open the mouth of the patient, their head existing in your sight; and lift their tongue, and then cut that nerve ligament according to the width within which the tongue can be freed from its recent location.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or concretion in that area, and this has been due to consolidation of injury, then you cut wax and separate that according to the width within which you have separated the ligament so as to dissolve the concretion.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And remember that do not cause a crack in the edge of the flesh and cut here carefully so that there is blood flow.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash away the marks of the cut with vinegar or with salt water or with rubbing alcohol; and place your tongue gently; this is done that the patient keeps their tongue in every night so as not to consolidate another injury.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is bleeding, place over the reddened area; but if the blood flows away, then apply a cautery to that spot with a long-lasting carbuncular tip which you should apply to this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And let that healing continue with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula on your tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes there are occurrences on your tongue that resemble small pus pockets, inhibiting the natural operation of your tongue; and strength often increases as it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on you is to open the patient's mouth in front of the sun and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it has a dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel emotion for, then do not touch that which is crusty.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is whitened in dampness, then you put the wax into it, and cut that with a fine spatula, and cut off from all sides; and if blood flows during your operation, then you stop at this reddened area so that the bleeding is restrained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have treated it in agreement with the patient, and wash it with vinegar and salt; treat that with another treatment as appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the removal of an abscess from both ears and that which is in the gallbladder, as well as other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an event occurs in the groin area, it is composed of glands which are gathered with fat, and they occur outside and are named as two auricles. If you heal them according to what we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of reddish color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for fear of the blood's flow; flatten that inside until it matures, then either you relieve that or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, rounded, and the root of it is subtle, then that is one to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And in your operation on them, you should consider, before your operation, if the abscess has rested under heat as expected or if it has diminished with some diminution; then place the patient facing the sun, his head towards you, open their mouth, and have the servant hold their tongue between their hands leaving it on an instrument of noble form which this is:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And make it out of silver or gold, and be subtle like a thread.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press that tongue and it shows the abscess to you, and place your finger there, then take force and hold that in the mouthpiece, and pull that towards the exit parts as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And also when you remove some cause of the tunics, and then strike that with the tool which has this form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is similar to forceps, however the extremities of them are curved, so that each one's opening faces the other side, very sharp, and they should be made of iron with a rounded edge.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	May if this tool is not at your disposal, then cut that with the blade which has the shape of this: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have cut one seam, cut the other according to this method of cutting, and let the patient bathe their body with rubbed water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to expel blood, bathe them with decoction of the sap from wormwood or of lavender leaves, and let that resemble one of the effects of hemostatics so that the blood flow be restricted, then treat that until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some ulcers occur in the groin other abscesses besides those two auricles, and cut those according to what I have said about cutting both seams equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that was born in her groin area, that abscess had the color of mud, with little sensation, it had narrowed the groove in her groin area, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, she had been forbidden from eating and drinking water, and she was already on the brink of death if she hadn't recovered for another day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had grown so much that it was accommodating two months' worth of food between the two ribs.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I cut through it surgically and held one of their fingers to do so, then pulled that out, and with the amount taken away was quite large from her body. Then I struck at that from which I could understand the other exit, then I forced open her mouth, pinched her tongue, then I held that finger in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then I removed a large part of it, and only some little bit of blood was flowing from her instead.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the groin of that woman was completely healed, she started drinking water soon, and then she began eating food again. Therefore, I didn't stop cutting out from that abscess for a long time, and instead an abscess formed in place of it, which grew as long as that continued.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I sewed it up and cauterized her groin, then for a while there was an addition; and then I wandered around and didn't know what God had done to her from that point onward.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On cutting open a swollen hump (or cyst).
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When pus starts forming in the uvula, and it is swollen, then it is named as a perpendicular (or cyst). And if it's located at the thickened part which is round, then it's called a lump.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	And when it has healed as we have said in the division, and your cure does not agree with that, and if there are times where pus from a cautery has stopped coming out of you and is subtle, then you should cut open what has been added round. And if it extends to that length, and it's bleeding, of dark color or black, and it doesn't feel like the patient's own, then you should try to open the cutting in the patient, as there is fear under their body.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you cut it open as I have said according to its whiteness and length, make the patient see your work and press their tongue with a tool that has the shape of this method, then hold that finger in the new opening, pull that towards down and cut that using one of two tools which were discussed in cutting both seams.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should not cut that open but what is adjusted above its naturally occurring addition, for if you cut more from them, it will damage their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And after the operation, use that water which we recommended in the preparation of two remedies, and cure it inside so that it becomes healthy.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Might it have frightened the patient because of the operation, consider using courage in the process of cauterization to ease their fear, and the method of cauterization should not involve fire alone, but you place your head under you when you are, and then press the tongue of them with the tool we said, then take water that we said at the tip of the cauterization, and apply it gently on the live cause, and pause where it is neither thick nor subtle, fill this cavity with the tool whose shape is like this:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the protruding part of them be in the cavity where medicine is placed like a cavity of a metal spoon, and place the tool on the patient with the medicine above her stomach. The patient should be lying down so that she can produce saliva or mucus from her mouth due to the internal medicine, so that it does not cause any unnecessary damage to them and lets that person rest.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand on the medicine, and squeeze it onto the back of the throat for about half an hour during which you see that medicine has degraded and calmed due to the chewing of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take hold of and cover that area near the end of the kidney, immerse the handle in medicine, insert the kidney into the handle inside a tube so that the handle sticks to this tube. Do this as many times as necessary until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the bladder, then let it rest until it dries up and falls off about three or four days later.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do it and after cauterization cleanse inside the bladder canal with a heated handle, adjust according to what is in the medicine canal of them, and wash with water that cleans, and cure externally with embrocation, and fill your insides with medicines until they become healthy.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of healing is safe because it prevents the operation and eliminates fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some ulcers are cured in the back of the throat with that which is delicate and cauterizes and operates, once it has been treated with sub-inhalation as follows: gather calamus, yarrow, rue, sage, Arabic gum, chamomile, dandelion, and similar substances from herbs, adjust all these causes, or some of them, in one mixture, and let them soak in wine, then boil; the mixture should be strained properly, and a small hole should be made at the middle of the mixture on which an incision tool is placed according to this manner; it should be made of silver or gold.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the end into the patient's mouth so that the steam rises to the back of the throat over the tonsil, while the tonsil becomes red.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then apply this to the remaining ulcers until they dry out, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the onset of abscess formation, which would exacerbate in the abscess. Do not do it like this, but you should wait for the declaration of the abscess in the patient's cauterization.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this tool at your disposal, then take a stick and create a hole in the protruding part of them with it, so that the mouth of the patient is blocked, which prevents the steam from burning their mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On Extracting Thorns and What Adheres in the Guts, as well as Other Causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Remaining ulcers adhere in the gut or thorn of a beast or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	So when you extract what is evident from those, on which your sight is cast, and then press the tongue against the tool in front of yourself, so that it becomes clear to you what is inside the gut.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not evident and is hidden in the gut, consider that you make the patient vomit before the food has degraded in the stomach; this forcefully exposes any cause attached to the gut through vomiting. Or if she chews a piece of bread or raw lettuce leaves or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, soak it with salt water and firmly apply it inside the patient's mouth, then have them chew that until it reaches the place where thorns are removed, at which point any forage will be exposed.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And you might take an eel and drink it with salted water, then let it settle inside your stomach and gently remove it. Or you might take a spoon and gently place it in your mouth and gently force it down.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if none of those causes has been exposed as we've mentioned, then use an iron tool according to this manner:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be larger than a small nail, and in the protruding part of them, there's a cavity which you should insert into their gut for ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And have their head raised up, and be careful not to touch their throat bone, for it may damage their body or the one that peels off the bone or spine, or that which a doctor holds in his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, let the patient do this with honey, thanks to their knowledge of the location of the attached cause and peels it off downwards, pulls their hand towards the tool in them, all according to the amount prepared beforehand so that it gets exposed.
Capitol .xxxix.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Concerning the extraction of phlegm associated with gout.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When phlegm is treated with what we have discussed in the section on treatment using medicines and not agreeing with it, consider this now for gout in the patient's foot under the sun. For when you understand the tongue of the patient through that tool which we recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you treat the phlegm, extract it from wherever it's in the gallbladder or from small detailed areas within it.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it's not possible to extract from there, then take a concave cannula and insert that into the gout in the foot, then place in the concavity of the cannula a heated iron, and do this as many times as necessary (until the phlegm is dead and comes out of the foot) and abstain from drinking water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a basin full of water, make an incision in that and do the mouth of the patient there, and wash the mouth with that; and don't touch any cause of that and let the water sit under the same hand for an hour before another at the backside, so that as soon as he feels the water coming down.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it's not possible with what we have recommended, then sub-steam the foot with garlic or with gum under the tongue using the tool that we recommended in the steam inhalation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and wait until it happens.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another way of operating in steam inhalation is as follows: take a vessel with firewood inside and cover it halfway with a blanket containing a handle. Place the tip of the tool in that handle; place above the steam inhalation; have the foot put its mouth at the tip of the cannula, and close its mouth so that steam inhalation does not escape until you know that the steam reaches the phlegm, as soon as the phlegm falls.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it doesn't fall, then you will repeat the steam inhalation many times, and abstain the patient from drinking, eat salty foods and herbs, and do not drink water, and so necessary is that this regimen should be followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the tool through which gout in the foot is treated when it's seen; and it resembles forceps like this, except when it's in them in any curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Which is laid across the foot, and its end resembles the beak of a stork that's wrapped around it, in which it's ground with a file, so that when you grasp any food, it doesn't slip.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol. XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the speech regarding buboes and in the section about them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Buboes are special spots, of bodily ways, according to their remembered description, from each in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they vary in puncturing and section of them by two ways, from which the one is for the essence of buboes themselves; and through this we get rid of the humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is about the places where they occur in the body, for when buboes occur in the head it's different from when buboes occur in the anus; and the bubo occurring in a meaty location is different from the bubo occurring at a joint; and each of them has its purpose for operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are some buboes that, when they don't need to be punctured but rather wait until the disease matures in those or their completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And there are other buboes that you must puncture when they cross over, not according to their completion but like buboes near joints. When a bubo is observed near the joint, its essence spreads until it touches what's circulating in it and corrodes the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing a contraction of that member; or if it's near the main body part, you should perform the puncture before it matures to prevent damage to the main body part; or if it's close to the anus, puncture the unripe one; and don't stop when you hit something during piercing due to incomplete digestion, but rather the one near the anus, so that it doesn't obstruct its passage within the parts of the anus and cause a fistula, or that which is made in the terminal part if it's not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And you should puncture when you know the time for puncturing the bubo, which is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it has matured when the pain and fever have subsided, as well as the reduction of flushness and pulse rate, and the sharpness of the head of the bubo, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when you know how to puncture by targeting the pus area left behind by the bubo and pus coming from the healing of the appendix.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Puncturing should be done according to the length of the flesh or body parts, if the buboes are located in the limbs or feet, at the site of the scars, on nerves and arteries; and later, in all similar locations where there is no reflection. In those that do reflect, puncture according to that body part.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	And when the bubo is in a meaty location, you should puncture it only after confirming its digestion according to completion, as we have said; if you pierce that before this, it extends the path of discharge and the texture's hardness, and hardens his body's mucous membranes and depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Cut out such pus pockets according to the size of the flesh or body, depending on the necessity, or according to what each part requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And ensure that you make small punctures in the smaller abscesses, and large, wide or deep incisions in larger ones according to the variety of sizes of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are those in which you need to force the opening down and then sew it up, when this is done as if with a knife and done like this until it sticks, as happens in too many cases of gout and rheumatism.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised in the three-angled section; and of those it is made like a fork figure, as with gout abscesses.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of them, where circular sections and lunar (crescent-shaped) sections are administered, they resemble those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	You should treat that which does not come out like with the superficial abscesses; ensure you puncture it through a superficial puncture, or make it flat just as much.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has solidified with healthy pus, you should puncture it without worrying that all the liquid will be removed at once; remove only part of it, then let the abscess settle inside another day. Then remove a larger portion, and let incisions heal gradually according to the depth until it's properly drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially if the patient is weak from illness or pregnancy, or a small child, or an old person in decline, where animal spirit's pus is resolved with the removal of healthy tissue, and strengthens their overall health, you should operate.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Treat this chapter with great caution, and when you puncture the abscesses in your operation, ensure that you cleanse any sores and consider whether the pus from the abscess is small or forms a flat section. In such cases, manage them according to their nature or traditional methods; if the abscess is large and the cuts are filled with pus, then make incisions as deep into each tendon as possible before the time.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if part of the tissue is removed from the abscess or you have made it concave in the area, then ensure that you repair it with thread or silk sutured onto the skin as when you stitch clothes, taking care to keep the wound moist; strengthen this on the third day; and proceed with treating and curing whatever comes out of the ointments until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If you experience bleeding during your operation, then administer water and vinegar baths in which you place a cloth on the area of the blood discharge. Then place this over the bleeding areas gradually.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, then ensure you continue treatment and care according to the instructions provided in this book's chapters and sections.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it's winter and the area of the abscess is a nerve region, then ensure you apply powders mixed with vinegar and oil in a cauldron, then place these on the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it's summer, and the areas are fatty, then ensure you apply ground powders in water with oil or vinegar and oil, all of which should be rubbed until the third day as we have said. Then ensure you drain the abscess and cleanse that area before continuing treatment according to what suits him/her until he/she heals.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	This is precisely what is necessary for the knowledge of treating abscesses universally; however, according to the method already explained regarding each type of abscess, on how to treat them singularly through chapters specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	The chapter discusses sections of abscesses that occur in the neck region.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck of the head, small abscesses occur, which have specific nodes containing tunics that are their essence; and the essences of these are pus.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And about their pus, as well as those that contain moisture resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those which contain moisture resembling powder and resemble them; and of those that are soft like wax.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all these, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as you should not cause a strain or tension when extracting such.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of these is that you probe them with an instrument whose shape resembles this somewhat, which is called an introducer, so that you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	And if what it contains is moisture, then divide it along the length with a section that is superficial according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And start from the section of line .B. within the line of .G. Then as the moisture is evacuated, then you excise that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause thereof, if more returns after this in case there was a reason for leaving some cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse this with Egyptian ointment if available, or alternatively in water and salt; fill the wound with this and leave it to rest until another day, when you remove all that is corroded from that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeatedly apply this cloth with Egyptian ointment according to the need and as long as you are sure there is no cause of corrosion from that skin; then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there's an abscess containing fatty nodes, then you incise that second one in this way:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	In the form of a cross section, cut into both sides of the section and allow it to drain from all directions, and apply your strength in removing the membrane which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If you feel an inconvenience when you're sewing, then do this as I instructed you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Similarly, perform the operation on the swollen abscess and its healing according to what we've told you; for any swollen abscess is treated with a light dressing, which has little inflammation and minimal moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some of these abscesses have characteristics like those you mentioned on the head in some men where there is not much moisture; this cause occurs when I incise an abscess at its head on an elderly woman and let it drain as if it were a hard, rough, white lump that could not be squeezed, and if someone hit that area, they would get hurt.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other abscesses on the head, other than this skull, like those that occur in children's heads and behind their earlobes, it is typically a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the incision of those from the lower part to ensure that the body finds relief in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And for those, treat them according to what is suitable for their healing process.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol Forty-two.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Regarding the condition of scrophulas which occur in the throat.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses are often found in the throat and under the chin, as well as in the armpits; some occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Those are the ones that occur in the throat; they are lumps that arise between them and is all scrophula of those is within their own membrane. As with nodes and abscesses on the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrophulas are lumps; some of them are fluid-filled, and others contain moisture, and among them, there are malignant ones that do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in the one where you have good positioning in the touch (Tocament), whose color is manifested like the color of blood and it's spread throughout the body, not attached to the nerves in the throat or veins, nor to the flesh, it is not swollen as when you incise it from a dry superficial part on top up to the body's line .G. within the line of .B., then burn that completely, extend the edges of the blood vessel with oil or with fatty oils if needed, as we have mentioned about abscesses in the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it's better to be more cautious not to incise the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And if the tool is not sharp enough or your hand doesn't fit well on the incision, or it calms down the patient, and you avoid unnecessary incisions; if you were to incise a vein or artery and prevent yourself from continuing with your operation, then stop the inflammation process in the wound by using powders that still have inflammatory effects, strengthen the wound, leave it where rest ceases the inflammation of the abscess and the wound becomes softened and begins to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the inflammation is relieved.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	And return to your operation while you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And further, inquire about the cause of any other small scrophulas according to what I've told you; therefore, incise those and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of a large vein, then you do not need to incise that scrophula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you move on, place a thick piece of wool beneath where it will fall by itself due to the incision.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And further, fill the wound with old cotton which you have already soaked in Egyptian oil, and then proceed to treat it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise the whole scrophula, then adjust both layers of the wound tissue and stitch them immediately so that there is neither any excess nor lack.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you notice there is excess due to the size of the scrophula, then understand that you need to incise the root of it, remove that part and perform suturing as has been described.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrophulas that contain moisture, puncture it from the superficial incision at the site where you see it in your location, stop the incision of what is below the body's buttocks, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And after performing the puncture, apply oil or something similar, so that it heals where there is inflammation.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you find the wound has been cleaned, then treat it with healing meat oil until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol Forty-three.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Regarding the condition of pus in the lymph gland.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients performed this section on the lymph node, and no one in our land has ever done that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the record of the speech about those things.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	And in those who have galls, ensure that the removal of the lymph node is avoided, because otherwise it should not be done prematurely as all veins and major parts of the body are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have boils under the tongue or in the throat or behind the ears, when illness is not in the ear canal, cut from the section of the preputium to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we want it, for us to incise that area, I make three circles around the preputium or four at small sections by width in the one between two circles according to quantity, so that the section is in the skin not on the cartilage. This location is suitable for a section being free of flesh and the veins from this are his own.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is cautious, do this by extending the incision in the throat to the chin, then make an incision into the skin so that it reaches the canal, but avoid the veins from the vessels if there's any concern of causing damage.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the fat as we have decided; and it signifies on that part of the canal by the inflammation which is from that oil which is in your disturbed body and through the extraction of the pus.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the wound opened for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the hour is ripe when a perforation is feared, add two layers of skin from the wound's membrane, and if that alone is the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh regenerate until it becomes healthy.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And discuss Albucasis that the summa of our conversation, this exposition is simply to show that some of these boils have already affected the throat of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and his servant was cut off, and others would incise the epiglottis so that the patient breathes on the site of the wound for a single respiration, and they were saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And thus we command that the wound remain open until the evil of the illness is consumed; and this evil of him lasts for three days; and then at this point we command so about the wound, and treat it until it becomes healthy.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eye is that one servant had a catel and was in her throat, and cut off a part of the lung canal, and I was called upon to treat him, and thus I too had heard as it sounds like the moan of the dead, and discovered the boil and removed the pus which was inside the boil small.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	And so I did confess that none of the veins or arteries were cut during that, and the breath escaped from the boil, and treated it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not harm the servant if not even in her veins, and some days later returned to treating his disposition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And I also say that near the section of the prepuce there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the section about boil that occurs outside the throat, it is called the hernia of the throat.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This boil named hernia of the throat is a large boil according to the color of the body, and moves in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it follows two manners, one that is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there's no need to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental follows two manners of which one is like fatty swellings, and the other manner is like a boil that occurs due to blockage of an artery, and in that case there's fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And don't assume that it touches his iron-like surface except in the case that is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine that and investigate it as per the description, and if you find that it resembles fatty swellings, and is not suspended by any of the veins, then you will incise it like fatty swellings, and extract it from what contains him in the skin and pus; and otherwise, then thoroughly examine its entire structure, and treat the area so that it undergoes treatment until it heals.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of the types of lumps.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the lumps there are various kinds, and I have already mentioned all the kinds in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And consider that I list this distinction between lump and fracture to avoid confusion.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So I say that with fracture there is a fever and heat and violent pains while the boiling of excess is quenched; and it's completed when afterwards the fever, pain and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	On the other hand with a lump there is no fever nor heat nor pain, and it contains this skin which is his own sack.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And according to the color of the body, its beginning is like a boil and it occurs in this way like pus, whether large or small, and they are according to two kinds, one that is fatty and contains moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And when you come to the treatment of a lump, that you express it and inquire into its beginning at the site where the thing is called an intruder comes according to what will be its form in chapter which is about this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiry for boils and all kinds of lumps, which is that you take hold of this intruder and force it into the pus-moisture site you find in the boil, and you will go over your words little by little inside until you know that this intruder has penetrated the membrane.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then finish your hand according to the size of the abscess, and then remove the contents inside, considering what is left in its wake.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture escapes continuously, of any color it may be, then you should incise on the superficial section according to what I've said about other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture in the wake of the contents, then you know it's greasy.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry on them as I instructed, with the area to be dried having the shape of an X according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	like this is taught to us, hang it with a string, and scrape the entire edge easily, and keep the skin or sack over that if possible, then extract that part from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	And if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy part, and you should gather all these in such a way that nothing of him is left for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	And if something remains from him for any reason, little or much, the lump will return as was usual.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that something of him has left a small part, then complete the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, place over that which is the abscess cauterized point, and cure that from another treatment until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it's a large lump, then open both of his lips and cure that which is enclosed.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if there is a pulsating vein opposite him, or not, then cut and heat the area that matches the glass which is glassy and smooths that width for two days or three until the wound heals; and then returns to incise that which is cracked from the lump.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol. XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the necessary forms for stricture in section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the invaginations, and they have three species, that among those is a large one, and from them there's another slightly smaller, and from them there's a small one.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large invagination is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the smaller invagination is like this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small invagination is like this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made with iron, salt, and the ends of fallen hair, in order that they cure within the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experiments, and they are named almond-shaped, and one of them is called bitter.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they have three species, that among them is large, slightly smaller, and a bit smaller.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experiment, forms like this:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the smaller experiment, forms like this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the smallest experiment, forms like this:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Let's ensure that they are for those abscesses,窦, fistulas, and lumps so that among them are from the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	They are round things, large ones, lions, like big needles with which the wounds are sewn, and they are made of citron peel, or of copper, or of iron, or of silver. And the best ones are when they are made of citron peel.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	They are experiments of black feathers, which you remember that for those they have been opened the fistulas in the cavity where there are reflections, that are reflected upon their lightness towards those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	They have three species, that some of them are long, and from the others they are slightly smaller, and from the others they are brief, according to the amount of width of the fistula and the constriction of him.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the large experiment made of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the smaller lead experiment:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the small lead experiment:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the needles are of special particles, that among them are some simple ones, which have only one curvature, and they have three species: large, small, and slightly smaller.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And from them are hooks, and they also have three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among those are uncis with two curves, and they too have three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among them are uncis with three curves, and they also have three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a large simple hook, as follows:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a simple medium-sized hook:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small simple hook, as follows:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of a large hooked needle:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of a medium-sized hooked needle, as follows:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a small hooked needle, as follows:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a large hook with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of a medium-sized hook with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a small hook with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a large hook with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a medium-sized hook with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a small hook with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which they section and abrade the lumps and abscesses, and they have three species: that among them is large, slightly smaller, and very small.
Forma de scapel gran:	The form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	The form of a medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The endings of those around which sections are made are sharp and the others are not-sharp, and they are not placed in this manner, but rather to cause a sensation during the incision of nodes, fearing an embolism of vein or nerve. For these reasons, the patient is cured and experiences tranquility for a little due to the adjustment which finds you the incision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of amalgams, and there are three types: large, medium, and small, like those of veins.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large one:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of the medium one:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of the small one:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made from lead and resemble a ring in which alcohol is placed.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it's on the outer extremity, the punctured end is in the hidden cavity, and that flows within and outside, as you wish, just like what you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of the cavities, which are hidden among your fingers, you must perform the excision of the abscesses without feeling the patients, and they come in three types: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of the siphons through which the blood flow is cut off, and they are in three types: large, medium, and small; these are their forms:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of lead like a citron, round with some length, and they are fine.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And choose these types of siphons: large ones, mediums and small ones, because with those you can quickly cut off the blood flow when necessary, and then when your first remedies are not enough.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those to cut off blood flow everywhere in the body; instead, use them only on fatty areas. Like that, apply them on the sweat glands and thighs, and on the elbow pits, breasts, stomach, and intestines, just like those of the fatty sweat glands.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some are cuts made with those instruments or smaller ones resembling small pricks according to this form; blood is cut off when done through phlebotomy, or due to embolism of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some cuts are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Regarding the treatment of men's breasts which are assembled by females.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some swellings cause the breasts of some men to resemble the start of becoming fatty, and then they swell the breasts, which are assembled by female characteristics, and we should oppose these swellings from afar.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who feel this, understand that you should cut along the lunar section according to this form, between line .B. and line .G., then scrape off all roughness, apply a salve on the entire wound, and adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and heal it internally once it's been treated.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast descends to parts where it is softened by its size like in women, then cut it into two halves with pus inside, each resembling a lunar figure. Each should be contained within the other half; here the major line should contain the minor as per this form of lines .B. and .G. Then scrape off the area between the two parts of the wound, remove swelling, and apply stitches and powders as instructed for internal healing when it has healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision for fear of the patient's anxiety and blood loss, then understand that you should submerge the wound in corrosive ointment and leave it to heal internally until this destroys fatty matter, and then heal it once it has healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Regarding the puncturing of abscesses that come out through the skin.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that appear on the skin are due to the types of phlegmonous swellings, thorns, which contain a layer that is pus.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And for those that contain moisture; and these containing moisture should be cut along the lunar section according to this figure: from line .G. to line .B. Once all pus in the abscess is evacuated, then cover it with clean material and leave it until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And after that, keep the area covered and treated with suitable ointment until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if it is an abscess of the types of nodes and phlegmonous swellings, then you cut over that in the same way as we have said in the section about phlegmonous swellings.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound is so extensive that it leads to gangrene, then apply cauterization as we described earlier.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Regarding the incision of abscesses that occur due to arteries or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the wound heals over that place, abscesses occur. The signs to identify whether inflammation or abscess is due to an artery or a vein: if it's due to an artery, then it appears elongated in the heart area; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, there is a whistling sound felt in that place.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein shows itself through the manifestation of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And if an abscess section is made, and particularly where the astringents are left, as well as in joints, and in the throat, and in localized swellings of the body; it is large, so that the treatment with iron should be avoided, and what is at the extremities, or at the head, should also be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	About that which is due to their swelling of the orifice of the artery, divide it into the long section; and then cut open the section with scissors and the artery, and release from the tunics underneath that which has been exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then touch that needle and let it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with a double stitch using silk thread - this causes you to remove two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then pinch that spot located between two ligaments at the place where the pain exists throughout it, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which oil is applied where the ligaments are located, so they fall into it; and treat that with suitable ointments inside to make it healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to vein blockage, then you should hold with your hand what corresponds to the size of the abscess at the end where it appears, and then introduce the needle into the spot that you have held with your hand. Let it penetrate; put a double thread in that place between which you will remove the one from the other side, and afterwards ligate the abscess according to what I said to you in the middle of the thread at both ends for two parts of the thread at each end.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that we may remove the thread, then introduce the needle into that spot with your first needle throughout the whole abscess. Insert four of your needles in each place.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And then dry out the abscess in its middle inside where when it is released from you, what belongs to it remains.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place over the powder which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and after that administer the treatment which is made with garlic and ointments so that it may be healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Drain the upper part of the abscess which occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	So it is with an abscess occurring in arteries and veins, similarly, when there's a blow or excessive work on nerves, and in resemblance.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the way it affects is through the places of the arms or the heel, or throughout all the locations where the joints are inflamed.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is an intense abscess, its color resembles that of another body, and it's located in the major parts of his disposition sections; when it is stretched with vehemence, it feels like a fainting sensation at the thighs.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that starts from within the body; instead, it leaves the artery, and it inflames everywhere without going to the parts in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So about those that are related to joints, do not apply iron to them, which might cause constriction due to strength.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Drain what is in the head or forehead at the place of the artery through the space.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it's a small abscess, then you treat that by opening it and cut off the root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it's large, then you suspend it with a string, scrape that area, and then hold it; adjust the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Done.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	From the section of abscess that occurs due to a disease that affects the stomach region.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Proceed to examine the various complaints observed in the stomachs of those people and in other parts of the body like these that are called fungal diseases due to their similarity with fungi; here, the root is subtle and the head of that is large; already, the lips of those are affected, it's from those that are small, and it's from those that have significantly increased.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one where in the stomach of the person were two parts that resembled fungi, and there was no distinction between those white ones, with subtle roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already, the lips of those were turned inside out and would split open; moisture flowed constantly from that area.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I inserted those and probed them in one on the back where there was a span of eighteen inches. And the other had a span of six inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And in the operation at the place of it, consider if the thigh is wet, and the color of that part is white, wet, with a subtle root; then you should insert through the left side, and in your presence apply the cautery to the fire, such that any complaints observed are expelled from that area; and if there's no disease, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the thigh is fearful and in fear, beware of applying iron insertion; rather, take lead made recently, strengthen that part, which way we said should be done; let it out for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust in the tightness of the lead thread; so, don't cease to strengthen the large lead within that part until it is removed and falls out naturally due to its work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	When it comes to serious illnesses, there often exists a cause for fear and anxiety, especially in the case of those affecting the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It might be possible that you separate the patient's condition, and then proceed to treat that area with a cautery so as not to allow it to return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And further, heal that which is inside where the wound has been healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be sure to not rashly conclude that which is of a dark color, with little sensation, under careful observation; for if it is like this, it may well be cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will return to remind you closely about childhood shortly.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Regarding the treatment of the navel prominence.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Navel prominence is caused by various reasons; or through fissures on the belly, which sits above the abdomen, and the body's or intestine as it were in other ruptures; or due to an ailment that flows from a vein or artery depending on what has been discussed elsewhere, or due to constricted breathing in them.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	It might be due to a tear in the belly or due to tension of the body tissue; then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the body; and there is severe pain, and it appears from various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it's due to the protrusion of the intestine, then that location is among those we've discussed, with varying intensity; and when you press that at your fingertips, it gets concealed, and then returns; and a strong, dull pain is felt on the inside, with vigorous activity being required for its introduction.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	It might be due to dampness; then it hurts but doesn't get concealed when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted or swollen.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it's due to an illness, then this sign appears in the abscess turning black and declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	It might be due to flesh alone; then the abscess is heavy, large, and hard, and it grows according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	It might be due to windiness; then touching him hurts.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation here is to consider whether the navel prominence is due to an arterial or venous condition, or due to windiness; you should abstain from treating him in that regard where there is fear and anxiety as we have taught you about abscesses caused by arteries and veins in the previous chapter.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the navel prominence is due to the intestine or the body tissue, you should instruct the patient to keep still and be lying on their side. Then try your examination around the circumference of the navel, and instruct them to face upwards between your hands on their buttocks. Also encircle with a wide strip around the circumference of the navel over the area where you felt the tension; extend the size of the abscess up and down on both sides by a large amount; press firmly or gently along that way when tying.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then open up the middle of the abscess on the muscle and insert your fingers into that area to grasp the intestine; and if you find it caught or enclosed by the muscle, then remove it immediately and force the intestine inward towards the depths of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you've found the tissue, then take it with your fingers; and remove any excess from him.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it goes against your artery or vein, then surround that motion, and proceed to your operation again; take two needles and put them in those strong points, and insert the needles into the circuit you made around the abscess in a manner of crossing, which you make penetrate; and strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, leave the needles and smooth out the area where you can lay down the extended flesh and let it fall naturally; or cut that when it becomes thin enough to do so, and then proceed to treat what remains of the ointment within until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the navel prominence is due to flesh or dampness in him, you should remove the abscess as we have said and treat the illness or dampness which you find in him, and then proceed to treat what remains and stabilize that area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	Regarding the treatment of children.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already discussed, in the division, about different types of children and how they are treated with medicines, that the treatment is more effective when done internally rather than externally as long as it doesn't result in an ulcer; and we've discussed illnesses caused by pregnancy and caution in their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients would say that some cuts in children can be cured where it's possible to eliminate it completely, such as from the cranium or on the nipples or thighs and similar areas on their limbs for total removal, especially when they are small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it's old and large, there is nothing to apply to him, for I cannot heal any of that, nor have I seen another, nor has anyone reached such a thing.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation here is when it's as we have said, that you proceed and leave the child to expel some sores caused by black bile, then proceed to drain it if found full and obvious.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the child in preparation for the operation where it's located, and proceed to fasten any tools that might be used on him; and then make a concave from all sides with a good incision so there doesn't remain anything that could cause his serious illnesses.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the sweat run, do not suppress it slightly, press the areas, and cleanse the sweat completely with your hand or with the tool on which it is possible for you among the tools.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If it causes you opposition of large sweat, whether inside the vein or the artery, then cauterize that where the flow of sweat has ceased, and immediately treat that with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Headache.
De curacio de ydropici.	Regarding the cure of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed in the division about the species of dropsy from water, and the signs for each type, using medicines for their cure.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the species of splinters alone, and it does not come close to the species of tympanisters or the species of dysentery, which among them is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this species of dropsy caused by tympanists with medicines and do not see your treatment manifesting effects, consider that if the patient has already become debilitated, or if there is another illness affecting them besides dropsy, as if it were their cough or chest pain etc., in such cases, be careful not to treat with iron, for this can pose a danger among these.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If your patient has excessive vigor causing the illness, and there is no other illness but dropsy alone affecting them, neither pregnancy nor old age, then the procedure for their operation is that you lift the patient between your hands, ministering to them directly as they expel their abdomen with their hand. Force out the water from their belly at the exit point of their anus, and take a thorn scoop in this manner:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	it should be of two long points at the tip end, like a thorn scoop; however, it is better if in your hand you hold it somewhat shorter and gradually, so that during the operation you do not enter into the intestine, and ensure that this happens.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider carefully if the generation of dropsy is from within the intestines; then you must know that for this section, you are away from the navel by the length of three fingers to the exit points, on the right side towards the anus.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of hydrocele is due to illness in the testicle, then your section should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of your patient is due to the womb, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not assume that your section should be on the side where you want the patient to lie, so as not to allow excess fluids to accumulate in that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And with the tool, puncture all along the length of the line, and then insert into that section. Lift your hand between the line and the siphon, and you should scrape this area; and if it's as much as the thickness of a fingernail or about so.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And puncture inside the siphon until it reaches the opening where the water exits; this is the location of the fluid.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And remove that and insert an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	it is similar to a fine silver cannula; it's made of silver or copper or lion horn, with a small hook at the lowest point of its opening and three hooks on each side: two from one part and one from another. The tip is cut like a feather according to this manner, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the tip of this, there is an armature which, when the instrument reaches the water, immediately rests over it. Therefore, you drain only half of the water in a moderate amount; if you drain more than that during this time, weaken the patient through dissolution of their animal spirit or, alternatively, cause them to have convulsions leading up to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Proceed to drain it according to the vigor of your patient and according to how you interpret the dispositions of the patient's virtue in their pulse and their goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And remove the instrument, drain the water which is causing it; this happens when it's temporarily retained by the line that holds the hook over the siphon, as I've gathered from you that you must puncture it according to this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And repeat the instrument on another day if you find that the patient tolerates this procedure, and drain a small amount of water. Do this for several days with caution, making sure not to let too much water go otherwise.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear for the patient and drain a large amount of water, then treat that with burial in hot sand and silt baths, and expose them to sunlight for long periods; treat that with drying medicines until they are healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and womb and testicles near the water extraction, as I have recounted in what precedes this.
Capitol .lv.	Headache.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Regarding the treatment of children who are born with unperforated bladder locations (urethral meatus).
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the child's maladies originate from within their mother's womb, and the head of its mixture does not penetrate (or is pulled straight or is in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	So cover their cut with a wound dressing as soon as they are born, under the soft skin according to this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And place in their abdomen a small iron pin and bind it there, leave it for three days or for fourteen.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they want to urinate, let them urinate; and return that later.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the iron [pin], already it is possible that the urine which passes over the area will not close this scar.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Let that of which the abdomen is straight be treated with an iron pin as we have said, for too many days within before it spreads.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Let those in which the abdomen is not in its place be laid out, the cause of which is that of those, the one born whose tail goes to the tip of the penis so it cannot urinate within, while raising the penis with their hand above; and it is not passed on to offspring, because the semen cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is an ailment in the male.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The manner of the operation in them is that the patient lies on their back, and you extend the tip of the penis with your left hand with strong extraction, then cut into the tip of the penis at the junction of the prepuce, as if it were done by a feather or without touching any part, so that half of his foreskin resembles the tip of the penis and the abdomen falls into the middle area according to this manner.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And remember when performing the operation of bleeding, what spots may happen to this; and pause with him at this point where you cut the blood vessel, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LV.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Concerning the white matter that happens in the prepuce in the tip of the penis and pus, darkness, and adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Maladies affect this white matter in the scrotum and it is a sign of male disease.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, leave it hanging from a delicate string and cut that in the place where it has spread everywhere; then cover that spot under with Egyptian balm; then treat it with clear balm until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the white matter is malignant, look at its color, then treat it with a cautery near the incision and around it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Let it be known if white matter is in the prepuce of the tip of the penis for uncircumcised individuals. And one part of white matter is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside; then let it be that you remove white matter which is inside until it hardens; and later you treat that outside, when you treat that period, there's no guarantee that it won't reappear.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And various things happen in the testicles and prepuce like blackness and corruption; so let it be that you remove all that has already degraded and is about to corrupt or that is already corrupted; then draw a line over that near that with honey, which is treated with flour of millet and white sandalwood powder and ground almond.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And treat it with the other cure until it heals.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Let it be if there is a need for bleeding, then apply a lunar cautery according to this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	A youthful cautery is in two time periods, it's for bleeding and when the wound becomes corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the tip of the penis is corroded and destroyed completely at that moment, let it be that you insert a tube of iron into the belly of the prepuce for when the patient urinates through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the penis (and this adhesion happens only in those where the prepuce is free, and circumcision is not required on it; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess) let it be that you scrape with blunt steel until the connective tissue dissolves and the tip of the penis is released from every part.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to scrape those thoroughly, let it be that you scrape from the tip of the penis and prepuce with blunt steel, and thus this happens: when the prepuce, being thin, is pierced lightly by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the prepuce and the tip of the penis with a strip of thin leather, which has already been moistened with water to prevent another disease from occurring.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And later treat it with astringent until it heals.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Regarding the cleansing of children and the treatment of what happens with those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution like other diseases: rather, it is specific to our operation and our will, and more so with children, we must assign the best operation and way possible that causes less loss for health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, note that the ancients did not perform circumcision in certain free individuals, who do not use them in their laws, but rather we have acquired this practice through experimentation. The cause is that I have found most artisans and barbers using circumcision and cleansing on the foreskin and on the testicles; they use ligament at the neck and incision on the thumb.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already tried all these methods and found that the best improvement lies in refining techniques with the use of forceps, relying on strength as a surgeon would in a refinement like circumcision. This avoids cutting too deeply through the chain of veins above, this being the chain of prepuce between two tunics, and ensures the tunica albuginea is left intact, while making the cut stronger for another procedure and ensuring painless recovery.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the refinement that is done with forceps, which are digital tools that surgeons use, does not ensure a safe incision of the end of the male member; for when it is strong it enters through his passage.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In circumcision surgery, if you use a knife, your operation will be tainted and corrupted.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is naturally short, and cuts heal in such a way that they do not require refinement, which I have seen.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	The refinement that is done with forceps and strength, the goodness, I have experimented with, which shows that the forceps have a proportional incision, so their sharpness is thus as their sharpness; and therefore when you press your hand they are proportioned two sharpnesses, cutting according to comparison in one time; and it makes compression of the strength into a figure containing the foreskin of all parts, at which there is no error from any side.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the way of the first operation is that you must make the child lie down greatly if he belongs to those I understand as a little one; not only should you hold the strength in his foreskin alone, but let him inside for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make that person joyful in every manner possible according to what you can achieve given their intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make that person stay among your assistants well prepared, and not in a careless state; hide the forceps in your hand or leave them on your chest, so that the child doesn't see those or any other of the tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the foreskin of the person and blow into the foreskin, and pull that in so that the tip of the foreskin is fully inside, and refine that from what is added to it by disease.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then place the location signed on the strength doubled, and then suture pus at that place with a small piece of second strength, and adjust it with the said pressure, hold that location of the strength so that it has good retention, and cut between two strengths.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then elevate the foreskin slightly and pull out the tip of the foreskin; and then slowly loosen the stitch, as it is better; hold a powder over that and on top of the powder place a piece of cloth in which is spread hog oil rubbed recently with fresh water; leave that one there for another day; treat that with treatment until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for refinement, this is how it should be:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the first set of forceps have a blunt tip and the others be pointed, so that it does not catch on the knuckle bone, and let the length of both sharpnesses be thus as the length of two penises equal in size.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in refinement is that if you cut too deeply, you will remove the entire intrinsic foreskin or part of it; thus you must be careful with your incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So consider to expand that of your time on your circumcision in front of the location and cut that according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot have it on your circumcision, then cut off that one and cut that (the foreskin) there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if three days have passed, and there is still an inflated state of the circumcision, then you should let that inside so that it softens the pus cavity, and scrape that with ease, and cut that according to what suits you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the tip of the foreskin, which will not belong to it.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then treat that with what allows the wound to consolidate using those powders that we have recommended in the section on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it has been cut through the foreskin at the point of incision, and follows over its parts above, this should not be visible to him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And treat that as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Capítulo LVIII
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder can be caused by obstructions due to kidney stones or an inflamed bladder wall, or by obstruction from a foreign body or a string, similar to what we have discussed about treatment methods in the sections.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and there is retention in your bladder due to a kidney stone which is in the neck of the bladder, then consider that the pelvis should be pressed against his buttocks.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place his legs under him and stretch his belly from the part above his buttocks, and the pelvis should press against his as much as he can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	And then the neck of the bladder is compressed to expel the stone behind it, so that the urine is expelled completely.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved as we have said and the cause persists on his pelvis, then consider that you should administer an extraction to him with a tool called a syringe, which has this shape: It is made of silver and is very thin like wire, similarly like the tip of a pen needle with its thinness equaling about half the length of a palm's width, and it has a fine tip at the end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way urine excretion takes place through that is: take the curved penis and bind it with wool or leather for good fit; insert the ends of the penis into the opening of the catheter, and cut off any unnecessary cause of the wool, but deeply insert inside the catheter with vigor. And later, adjust the catheter on the edge and on the album of urine.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And have the patient lie down on their side, and clean the bladder, and anoint the penis with a mixture of oil, olive oil, and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the catheter so that it reaches the root of the penis; then fold the penis over towards the navel; then push in the catheter inside that; then push in that part until it reaches the bladder; and let the patient lie down so as to reach the empty cause, and do not proceed as described here, but follow the body where there is distortion.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And gradually extend the penis with the wool little by little, for urine soaks the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And extract that and do a cure with urine, and use the catheter, don't stop doing this and use the catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LI.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of bladder irrigation with vinegar and the tools which should be in agreement with this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or if there is congestion within it, or if it is constricted by inflammation, and you want to distill water and medicines into that area, then this clamp is used, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	And if it is closed at the end of this, it is then sealed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three parts: two from one side, as often times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning is a concave spot where this is placed, and according to the quantity that displaces it, it's added, within which whenever any cause is driven away by that from the moisture, it is drawn away, and when it is expelled, it draws moisture in itself. When it's expelled long, as it makes use of the clamp, on which naphtha is poured in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So if you want to dry up moisture in the bladder, insert the tip of the clamp into the wetness and draw out whatever is pushed up there from above, for the wetness is drawn into the cavity of the clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And later insert the tip of the clamp into the penis according to what we have discussed about the catheter; and then push out the wetness with whatever you're pushing in, for that wetness immediately enters the bladder and lets the patient lie down.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Shape of the subtle catheter through which the bladder is irrigated, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or copper, such that its tip resembles a small feather, and let the inside of its canal be smoothly hollowed out.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And later take the bladder in motion, and pause there the moisture you want to irrigate into the bladder, and then place that between two pieces of hard ligature with a double-ended tool, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And later insert the tip of the catheter into the penis.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And later, place your hand on the bladder with the moisture in an extended position, so that when the patient lies down, that moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder present, then take one from pig skin and make it into that circle; and puncture all of its roundness; and later insert a strong rod in those parts, as they are turned; and later add the circle similarly when added, since you place there whatever moisture you want from the water, oil and water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And later you place that in the tool and do it as you did with the bladder, expressing your hand so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LX.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of bile.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed the divisions of bile and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between bile produced in the gallbladder and bile produced in the bladder, and the signs of that.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about bile where surgical operation is done with my hand and sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The bile produced in the bladder is precisely that which is found in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will narrate that more clearly and briefly in exposition.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Thus I say that bile produced in the bladder predominantly occurs in children; and the signs of this are that urine discharged from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and sand appears there; and the patient rubs their penis, and red spots appear on penile skin, and later they are dried; and under this condition they have a hole in the anus filled with lumps of those substances.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it's quick recovery for those children who have reached twelve years old; and it's difficult treatment in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In young people, it is halfway through this because it is among them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And for the one whose liver is larger and recovery is quicker; If it's smaller, it's against that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So how do we approach treating that, start with the beginning of that which we reform when baptizing him who extracts the whole opening of the spaces where they have their intestines; for that opening in some occasions prevents the liver from being questioned about them.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then take the patient onto their feet and adjust them so that he feels a burning sensation under him to make the liver descend into the bladder opening or it jumps out from any place or in some occasions.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that incision between your hands prepared, and the hands of him leave his belongings, so that the bladder can be completely made to decline towards the parts left.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then remove that and all of that excess.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the liver in the space, then you take care right away about it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you don't feel it all right away, then take that with oil on your little finger of your left hand, if the liver is for a child or if the person is an adult who has reached puberty and insert that into his anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And remove the liver where it was left with your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that little piece gradually into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that with your finger and expel it outwards towards the parts outside of the place where you made the section.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And tell the surgeon to press on the bladder with his hand; and command another surgeon with his right hand to extend the genitals towards the parts above, and with his other hand apply pressure to the navel which is left by the genitals in the part where the section was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then introduce some foam from that, this is its form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and divide it within him that which is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, before the left thigh; and make a section over that liver and your finger is at the anus, and made transversely, so that the opening outward is wide and inwardly narrowed according to how much I removed of the liver it must be for him, and not more than this, as we restrain your finger which is in the anus the liver must be over the section, and it is forgotten about infeasibility.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there are some parts of the liver that have angles and borders, which makes his ejaculation difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that which has a lion-like appearance to gleam, and it is round, and it makes him have a quick ejaculation.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it's the one that has angles and edges, adjust in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it's not like this forgotten about, then take that with your fingers over it, or strengthen over it decently, the tip of which is like a file on which you press against the liver and don't escape from him; or insert his left instrument of curved tip.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	May if you can't over it, then widen the tool a bit, and if you feel blood flow, cut into strengthen that with acidified vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	May if the liver is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the opening of the bladder, and gradually cut over it; and then push slightly towards that area; and similarly proceed if they are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it is large liver lump, then ignorance is that you cut that with a large incision, which happens to the liver one of two causes: or it dries up or becomes absorbed in its continuous urine distillation, so that the place does not become entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	And if you administer expulsion of him that is forgotten about, or carve in the fracture of it with scissors where he extracts that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	And once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ashes of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over it cloth dipped in oil and vinegar, or in grated oil and water rubbed, so that the pus cavity can be reduced.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then elevate the liver over his throat, and do not loosen the string in the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And once that has been loosened, wash the place with water and hot oil, and then treat it with diaphanicon ointment and with diabazilicon ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	And if in the wound pus cavity occurs, adjust and corrosive, and from that resembling this when his urine is in the bladder frozen, and for him it is forbidden urine (and this is known by the discharge of urine with blood), then take your finger into the wound and extract that urine, for if Roman causes the bladder to corrode the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with vinegar mixed, water and salt, and against all species, with that which you consider appropriate for healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And in all the hours of total treatment, you must attend to both thighs and adjust the medicines which are applied to that place.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the kidney is small and located in the middle of the bladder, and urination is forbidden, then treat that with what I recommended beforehand until it reaches this section; and as part of this treatment complaints about this condition are reported to be limited; and having done so, and now take a perforating iron file, which is the shape of this:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular end, sharp, inserted in the handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And take the file, and with that on your side leave the kidney near the patient's bladder so it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the kidney, piercing with ease until the perforator reaches that kidney.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And with your hand, rotate the perforator in that small kidney gradually, making the perforation inside while letting the other side penetrate; as soon as urine is liberated.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on that which is being operated on of the kidney at the end opposite the bladder, when that has been punctured and sealed by urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	And if this treatment is not suitable for any reason preventing that, then leave the kidney with a file, and another file on the kidney.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then cut across the kidney in this bladder between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then remove that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the ligament and change the position of the organ that is disturbed in the injury.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to leave the file on the kidney, only so that it does not return to the bladder. The other ligament above it stays in place, as when the file is removed from near the exit of the kidney, the disturbance returns to its place and regains the injury.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that reason it is necessary when you have the file above, that you lift the disturbance to the parts above, or that it returns to your own level, and regains the injury in this way as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On removing a kidney of a woman.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	In women, few kidneys are produced.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	And if you find a kidney in one of those, then treatment for that is difficult, and it is forbidden by various methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The one of them is that the woman's urine is long.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman being able to describe if she miscarries when pregnant by a man or if she is barren.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	And the third is that you do not find a woman knowing this art, especially the operation with her own hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of this section near the kidney in women is far from the location of the kidney, so you need a preliminary section, and there is fear in that.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	And if necessity compels you to do this, then seek out a pregnant woman who knows, and she will be found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	And if you are lacking that, then find a skilled pregnant woman or show one a married woman well versed in women's affairs, or a woman who has had part of this skill taught to her.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then have that woman present and command her to do all that you tell her, from the inquiry about the kidney to the beginning; which reason is that she observes if the woman's urine is long, then make what she says true in her own belly and find the kidney.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find that one, constrain it with what she says, and then command her to cut into that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	And if it is not long, then command the matron to insert what she says in the woman's belly and inquire about the kidney, because place her left hand on the bladder, and press that well.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	And if you find that one, then gradually increase that from the opening of the bladder to the parts with the strength of her own hands until it reaches the space between the thighs.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then cut into that position at the edge of the woman's belly should reach the space between her thighs from any part to where she stops and center the kidney in that area, and let what is said by her not be increased by the kidney.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section is few at the beginning; and then insert the tool on that section, and if you feel the kidney, then adjust the section according to the quantity that she knows the kidney should be removed from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the species of kidney are lumps: those of them are few and large, rough and sharp, long and round, and have tails.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And therefore know how many species there are from you for this reason that you indicate about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see the disturbance of the organ, adjust at the place broken into and take that for an hour until the disturbance is removed, and then return to your operation until the kidney is out.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make ready for yourself the tools that you mentioned in the removal of a kidney in men, so that you may be helped by those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want the disturbance to leave, and know that the expulsion of the disturbance is from the place that is cut into, then you sprinkle powder over the area and strengthen it with powder and constriction descent, and do not repeat this; and leave the kidney and do not remove it, for a woman's urine will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore when the sharpness of the disease has subsided somewhat after several days, and the location is settled, then you return to your operation while the wound is still visible.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Regarding the section on inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An inguinal hernia is nothing but an addition of moisture in the white muscle, which contains the testicles and is part of the male reproductive system; it is called the testicle.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it happens in the proper abdominal wall which nature has prepared for him at the location of the sperm, when it is cut that there is already another sperm; and it is the reproductive system between the white testicle, which we have mentioned, and it is not this but a twist.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to debility that affects the reproductive organs, so it inundates this matter into those, and sometimes hits affect these organs with a blow made on the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has various colors; or the color of it or it declines to yellowish or bloody, or reddish, or it is black and fatty, or it is watery white, and that is what matters.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows where this accumulation of water is in this case: if it's in the white testicle which we've mentioned, then the pustule becomes red and slightly elongated like a sperm figure, and the testicle appears, as the moisture extends from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper abdominal wall, then the pustule becomes red at the location of the sperm and that's why we estimate that there is another sperm.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the reproductive system and the white testicle, then there's a twist.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the color of the moisture, then you inspect the color of the moisture in the pustule at the site of the incision; and according to what exists in the mark left by the incision, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the treatment of this case, then we instruct that if it's possible for you, let him use diuretics and increase his fluids intake.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then have him rest on his back for some time or another, and place your wet cloths under him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then place yourself on the left part of him, and instruct that the attendant follow on his right side, who will extend their arm to one of two sides towards the location of the testicles and the navel area.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a long blade, and split the testicular system from its midpoint longitudinally towards the belly button.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the section according to straightness equaling the line that should be of the testicular skin, going up until it reaches the white part of the testicle.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And cleanse that, observe and guard yourself so as not to penetrate that; and your cleaning goes up until it meets the sperm more easily and skillfully examine your cleaning according to how much is possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the white part full of water with a wide hole, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two labial sections with scissors, and extend the white part upwards; don't touch the testicular system, and cut the white part in that manner as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut it all or in pieces, especially its finer part; if you don't examine the incision precisely, there's no assurance that the water won't return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the sperm is moving out of its system from outside during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the white part, return inside it, and adjust both labial sections of the testicular system with stitches, and treat that just like other wounds until it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the sperm corrupted by another illness, then instruct that you cut off the blood vessels which are under the suspension ligament, extract the sperm, and treat that as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the water is added in two parts, then know that these are two hernias; so cut this part as you did in the other equally; and if it's visible to you that it's one operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you cleanse the wound, and interweave between the sections wool soaked in oil or in rubbed oil; leave aside for later another piece of wool that you have soaked in vinegar and oil, spread that over the two testicles and the belly button; lay down additional layers of cloths and powders, and place those under him according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then have two cloths placed and be filled with absorbent wool according to this pattern; have the ends be positioned where they are pressed by hands or damp wool, and place them in the waistband of the trousers, one end is inside the other, the other end at the location of the navel, and two ends over each thigh, and two other ends elsewhere on the hips, and all tightening must be done within the waistband of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of cutting at the section; and you take a fine surgical knife and cut into that the reproductive system, and it's lit as we have recommended when the white part containing the water is revealed, then you use the cautery in this manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	It resembles Greek writing.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that chip, and light it inside so that all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the chip with fingers, scrape with fingers, and scrape with a fine cautery; and cut that second as far as is possible inside so you can remove it all; and guard against the fire not touching him.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is placed safely and far from the flow of infection, and better than an operation in a section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	Yet if it gives you contradiction to make an abscess cut during the section or during the cautery period, or infection flow, then observe what contradiction you cause through this, with your cure, which you apply to him according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	Yet if the patient is weak and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then perform a puncture according to what I recommend; and this is when you certify that it's true, through what we said about meanings, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	And observe that you make the patient lie on an elevated bench, pierce the abscess near the lowest part of him under his left side, and stop the puncture according to the length of his body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And if it's an incision wide enough that all the water runs out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then press on the spot with your hand and lift that area, to let go of the remaining water.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat it so that the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	Yet if contradiction is in the expulsion of water at that time you puncture: and this is not done unless through what the white wax in the wound's aperture causes contradiction and prevents the outflow of water, then observe that you insert into the wound a wetting or instrument with which water is extracted from dropsy, its shape being followed; or adjust in the pressure of the wound a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and is purified around three months or about those; and when it's purged, then puncture according to that method, so that the patient will pass his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Section sixty-three.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On section about fatty hernias and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	And know that in the section about this kind of hernia there is a fear of losing it due to infection in major circumstances; for me, I see the dismissal and saving you through that better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation in that and the specifics of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	So, say that abscesses occur in the bodies where the organs are composed and this happens due to various causes: or by acute overload of pus, which is spread among the organs, or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it doesn't swell in him, and it's a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And for the light one is an abscess that has ruptured, whose color is dark, and there is no movement in him.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some occur due to obstruction of the veins, and by inflation of those where you already perceive the memory of it, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	And that which is due to the inflammation of arteries is known by the spread of pus when you press that with your thumbs; and don't pierce where you touch.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	And the one made by inflammation of veins doesn't spread from any cause due to your compression with your thumbs.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that a section can be made on this type as well as on other meats; and you incise the seam of the organs, then place your hand near those parts above, extract that from the white chip, release the suspensory ligaments of the veins, tie them, and cut the suspensory tissue where you remove that from all sections of your hand.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	And then if the hand is already at those meaty parts solidified, then observe that you remove the hand and incise there.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if it's adhesion due to any reason within the chip, or between those that are among the muscles, then observe that you remove all that adhesion and incise it through a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it's the birth of flesh in the location of the adhesion which is behind, then observe that you incise all that belongs to him, and remove the hand as we said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with oiled wool and vinegar; and then treat that like any other wound until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Section sixty-four.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that are due to wind.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Wind is an abscess wrapped in some envelope resembling a seed during the softening of the testicles, and causes difficulty in exercise and walking on the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness is due to fear from what it's preceded by memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, observe that we perform an operation there according to how I first did it.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that you should make the patient lie on an elevated bench; then place the testicular suspensory ligaments at those parts left; and place your hand near the organ seam at the muscles which are palpable to the touch; and have other attendants with you, and extend those with strong extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then penetrate through the sharp point across the section into the right of the vessels where the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scrape off all parts as we have instructed in the extraction of stones which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place there a needle with a double hook on it, and pass that through the first of the areas where you are bleeding, and pass this other path through the last of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then penetrate those through the middle area in a right diagonal section according to the length of the body, and extract whatever is added by the fetid moisture and corrupted substances.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound according to the cure of other wounds in which you want health to be generated through its own nature that cause veins to flow in one or two generations, which is not bad for this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If bleeding occurs throughout all the veins, then cover that the testicles should be extracted or that the testicles are removed through this way from the veins for it to consume in the veins themselves, so as to be deprived of all nutrients due to the penetration of the veins, or that they become established, or that not be youthful at those.
Capitol .lxv.	Title 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernias.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends from the abdominal cavity over the belly, from parts of the small intestine, so moving those hernias towards some of them.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the abdomen or from a blow to him, and these two types occur due to such causes: through impact, or by throwing something, or through shouting, or through lifting any heavy cause, or through pressure.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when due to extension of the abdomen, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and there is an abscess equal within the preon because the abdomen squeezes the hernia.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when due to a section in the abdomen, it causes sudden intense pain; and there appears an abcess different from his body near the downward apparent cause, and this is due to displacement of the hernia, and his body towards parts above the abdomen.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some bleeding occurs outside on the skin of the hernia, and this is called intestinal hernia with scarring.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some bleedings happen due to wind, and some bleedings run into the hernia opening, where they are held back, and this is a great harm in the thigh area, and some bleedings cause evil pain that increases especially when squeezed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these symptoms of this ailment one should be cautious, so that you avoid being caught by it there.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of performing that operation is to command the thigh to return the hernia towards its cavity from inside its abdominal cavity if it returns according to its own movement, and then envelop it on his back between your hands, and lift up his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then tighten the thread that seizes the thread of the testicles from above, and cut through the thread of the testicles all along; and then fix in two folds of the section according to your needs to open up that section for them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section according to the amount that is possible from there, you should make an opening in it.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape off that layer of fat which is left by the thread of the testicles, while revealing the white hard abdominal wall from each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you intervene in that which seizes the testicle, that which is between white abdominal wall, which is left by the thread of the child, and between the abdominal wall laterally, and free from that adhesion that is behind the child.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then have your hand on the thread of the testicles from above, and also extend the white abdominal wall in that area with your left hand, and lift up the child towards the abdomen at that section; and command the assistant to extend the child there as you dissolve that adhesion behind by completion of the solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And seek out your instructions so that there is no cause for the hernia being enclosed in the white firm abdominal wall.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause from him, then you remove that to the abdomen leaving it.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle with a thick double thread, which is at the end of the abdomen, which is below the thread of the testicles, which secures that section; and then pass its ends in such a way that four threads emerge from it inside so as to form a cross; and wrap some parts of them into a pattern resembling an X; and do this for the abdomen we have mentioned where you leave the thread of the testicles firmly on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the threads and firmly tie them in such a way that none of the veins passing through those can pass any cause, so as to prevent the formation of an abcess from here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And make another tight loop about three fingers from the first loop, away from his navel. And between this two loops, smooth that part of the abdomen which is left by the thread of the testicles as big as the mentioned one, and cut all the rest in a circular manner, and take out the child.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then penetrate into the section below the testicles' chain by segment where it runs pain and healing as we have described in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil, place it on the wound; and administer the substance that we have described (and some whitish pustules are treated with a cautery, which we mentioned earlier about the application to the vulva where the flow of pain occurs, and there are certain pustules that occur). Let the substance rest inside so that it may fall by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the healing of your patient is delayed, then let hot water be applied, and place it over the area where it will fall as we have described.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And treat the wound with another cure for wounds within which healing occurs.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On venous hernias.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, it has not been observed that any part was burned during the healing process of your patient.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones would say that this occurs as we have described in the hernia that is made from it; which is when you press the vessels near the section over that facilitates your condition; and then dry off at the middle location around the pustule where that operation takes place, within which the vessels will fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the disturbance that occurs in the joints.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some pustules may rupture in the joints as we have said, and you should lift up the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not let any cause of the intestines come to the genitals; if they do, there are few; and return it within all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged with this, an opening occurs in the cushion where it descends the intestine into the cushion; and this happens due to the extension of the cushion which we mentioned in the joints. The cause is that the cushion is extended, and then the area becomes softened and there is a pustule formation, lift up the area.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of your patient is with cautery as it follows the description of what happened to him/her.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some pustules are treated with iron according to this method: and it is that the patient lies on his/her two middle places among your thighs, and then dry off the area of the rupture of the pustules by pressing at the section according to the width in the amount of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white cushion that is below the chain where it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the rib and place it over the prominent area of the cushion, and press it against the belly's navel.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then place the two prominent areas on the end of the cushion's rib, and adjust one of those to the other with suturing.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then remove the end of the rib, do not cut into the cushion completely, nor stretch the skin or any other reason as I have learned in treating intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you insert needles, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; where the cushion tightens and does not adjust the prominence of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this area, which is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On softening the chain of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Pustules in the chain of the testicles in some men is softened by this means that the tissues within that area are softened, and protection is provided for him/her.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is treated in his/her healing to lie according to their two places and elevate the entire chain which is softened over the natural chain; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, place in the beginning the excess of the softened chain with three stitches or four and secure suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the sutures; and then treat for the treatment of other wounds until it is healed, letting fall the needles.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but due to certain reasons it has been noted to me that I should remember him/her in this free document; and the recall of him/her is not necessary, but only for two methods, among which one is when someone is questioned about that subject by a physician, they must know his/her treatment in order to answer appropriately. The other method is that we sometimes have need of castration on other animals due to our offspring's needs, as well as on mares, bulls, pigs, and similar to those animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by atrophy or through rupture at the junction.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	If it is done through atrophy, the method of operation consists in having us cut the animal in hot water until his/her testicles are softened and hanging.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand until they dissolve without showing any signs of touch on the skin.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	And for castration done through rupture and junction, you must have the animal and press on the chain of the testicles with your right hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then fix the suspensory, and cut into each side of each area where two ligaments process.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then remove those pus that you have scraped out from any location.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not allow any cause of the bladder, but rather the subtle bladder which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is the better one which is done by twisting, where twisting slightly lets out no cause of the testicles so that the animal desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Capitol seventy.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Regarding the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs according to two methods: one is when there's a division in the area of the testicles, where it's like having half a female, which has hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some urination issues from that flow through the ducts of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In females is a special case: it's that the female organ on the pubis is like two testicles in men, somewhat reduced but still present at the location of the prostate and similarly to male ones, having two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is for three species: two from men and one from females.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you should cut those tightened tissues so that the secretion from that escapes, and then proceed to treat those with the treatment of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species from men where he urinates, which is through the duct of the testicles, there's neither treatment nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol twenty-one.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Regarding coughing and prominent flesh due to issues in females.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A strong cough is adjusted to natural causes and it's treated with the appropriate examination; sometimes, coughing in some females can be exaggerated to such an extent that it spreads as much as in men, even getting involved in copulation.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	And when you notice the excess of coughing with your hand or on a finger, cut it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And don't finish with cutting, especially in the beginning of the ribs, for fear that pus might spread.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat that with treatment until the wound heals.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	A naval lump is flesh that appears within the mother's belly filling it up, and from this place it spreads to other areas according to the similarity of the anus (for this reason they initially called this "tail malady"); therefore, when you notice this, cut it in the same way as you would with coughing, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .lxxii.	Capitol seventy-two.
De curacio de alratica.	Regarding the treatment of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arthritis is when there's no perforation of the female organ or that it has a small tear.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be due to nature or accidentally.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidentally, it's due to the tail malady that has preceded, and this happens either from an unadjusted piece of flesh or from a subtle or thick bladder.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it can happen inside the mother's womb, on her ribs, in excessive pus of her body, or in lower pus. Avoid copulation and any pregnancy attempts, and strongly avoid menstruation as well.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The recognition of that is done through examination by the doctor, if the protrusion is visible, it's closer; but if it's not visible, then you look for that with your fingers or under the belly.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the protrusion is due to a subtle bladder, it's close to the two lips, so you touch and burst that area.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you pause over the two lips until you feel your fingertips under both breasts, indicating that it's close.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the female is on her two feet, her thighs are extended, and you further spread the two lips until that subtle bladder is burst and the protrusion is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil, place that over the area, and do this for a day to ensure that the cut area doesn't harden.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the bladder is thick and fatty, then you should cut it with a knife or with mint leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the protrusion is due to fatty tissue, then suspend that on your finger and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that help stop pus discharge like avocado, dragon's blood, and earth, adjusting them with chicken broth.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead pipe to prevent the wound from hardening quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that for several days and apply hot lime water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then, with the other treatments for hardening, let it heal fully.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes incidents occur during the birth of other tissues in the mother, so you should cut them following this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If you've noticed it's due to a pus-filled boil in the mother, then avoid iron or any other method against such boils.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Capitol seventy-three.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail issues, and red botulinum that occur in the female genital area.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are the observation of blood in the openings of small veins where it continuously carries pus; and for old hemorrhoids, they're treated accordingly.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already discussed in the division the species of those [things] and the signs of those [things], and stated which ones receive treatment and which do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	So say that boils and warts when they are on the surface of the mouth and do not appear to feel anything, then in those there should be no treatment with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Only those that are on the surface of the mouth over which you feel, these are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And command that you place the woman in mustard powder and then extend alcohol over her limbs, or on linens made of rough material, and penetrate those with razors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And afterwards, you should dust over those things with the extracts from one of the grinding powders made for chewing, as is done with ginger and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then scrub their feet for an hour, and rinse that off in hot water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the extracts from the sweat persist, then have that person make a decoction of sumac and of vinegar of almonds and of apricots and of similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of garlic and mix that with honey and wine and add to it, making a poultice from that on the back of the person.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the sweat is eliminated, then drink it; otherwise, apply it to two flasks, and on the nipples do incisions.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and immerse it in the juice of pressed onion or in the juice of goosefoot or in vinegar mixed with water, and apply that to the area; and then treat the area with greasy ointment until it heals.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	Only take the alcohol that you find unpleasant to use, and when you apply it according to what I have said in terms of oil equivalence.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat it until it heals.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Capitol .LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Regarding the perforation of cysts that occur in the mouth.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	The species of abscesses that occur in the mouth, such as those from toothaches, abscesses from teeth piercing, ulcers, boils, ulcers with pus, abscesses in the neck, and others.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already discussed these illnesses and their species and the signs of those as well as their treatments in this section.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I will say in this treatise about the cautery for abscesses that come to the mouth when it's from abscesses that are healed, and if you want to know how the operation is done with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	So when you consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp upon percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes it turns red, and if you feel anything about that, then note down the need for perforation of it, and treat it with what aids in maturation while the intensity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then have them make incisions on the abdomen with a knife that has two blades; lie down on their back and place their feet at the lower part just below their belly, spread out their thighs, and hold their arms above their heads, tie them in such a way as to be comfortable.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should follow with her left hand and administer the instrument from which the opening of the mouth is uncovered; its shape will come about in those cases that will be applied.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, fix it at the bottom of the mouth of the woman, and that which enters from the instrument into the mouth should not be larger than the opening of the mouth and disturb the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the tool is larger than the opening of the mouth, then you should sprinkle powders on the texture of the opening of the mouth so that all instruments are prohibited from entering the opening of the mouth.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And when you should sprinkle the powder that moves in the tool from its bottom up and have the minister hold the tool while stirring the powder until it opens the mouth.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when you notice the excitement, and it is touched with the hand and feels hot and moist, then you should dry that part of him on a warm stove.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the healing is discharged, then you should apply to the wound a poultice submerged in rubbed oil or olive oil with some bitterness; and place the leg in the dry section at the bottom of the mouth.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And let him walk away from the mouth and over the wool cloth submerged in water where the haws are boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then, two days after being treated with greasy ointment until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some sores are washed with water and the mouth and wound is treated with vinegar and honey, then returned to water in which garlic or almond root has been boiled, and later returns to greasy ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is inside the mouth swollen, then you should forbid its treatment with iron, and instead treat it with what we have said in this section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol .LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner to medicate the embryos when they occur according to an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife knows in the beginning the figure of normal childbirth through signs from her body, and when you see the woman being squeezed by her limbs and wanting to smell the air, and on this she is excited because it is near her part, and accelerates the appearance of the embryo, then you know that this part occurs according to a natural figure, and it is the movement of it towards her head, and the second one hanging or suspended under the umbilical.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you mark those signs, then make the patient's abdomen compress itself so that when it slightly pushes up the embryo as it presses on its head, have the second one do this to them, and dispose of those excesses in a good transformation.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	May it be that this part is unnatural and unfeasible, when the embryo rests on its feet and the body of the patient rests in front of its head and the foot of the patient,,. or rests the head of the patient and the hand,, or in the abdomen, and lightly it is turned onto its back, resembling impossible figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing every figure of those, and what is the cause in those for what it signifies and where it stands.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the operation rests on its head by natural emergence, that is strong for women and takes place in their difficult part, and sometimes the virtue has already weakened, then perform this process or what women have it, and evaporate with her a drink of water mixed with fennel juice and oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then the midwife inserts her finger between the woman's buttocks and small opening in that place for the second one, or dries that with her thumb inside where there is moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And presses on the abdomen of the woman so that the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it doesn't descend, then have the woman rubbed with colic water and fennel juice on her back.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then order them, and near her chest, have the abdomen compress itself and make that sneeze with strength; and keep their mouth and their nose open for an hour, so that the fetus can come out quickly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two parts of the fetus are ready to be born at mealtimes, then have you reduce those with ease little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If you don't follow the advice, then have the woman rest on a stool and lift her legs up, and near place the stool against the ground; and let the woman be held so she doesn't fall from the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the parts are not turned inside and the fetus doesn't move, then insert those and remove the membranes of the fetus or tie it to the mother's hand with thread and pull that out equally, so that it can come out quickly.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the emergence of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus moves onto its feet, then have you push those in, and near rotate the fetus slightly, and near make that equal, and near take one of its legs and spread those slightly.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When it is situated between the thighs, then have you command them to expel it, and make that sneeze with strength, so that it can come out quickly if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it doesn't come out quickly with what we have recommended, then have you return the fetus slightly by slight movements until you find that natural second figure, so that it will come out quickly with a little emergence.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden to do all that we have recommended, then take of alum and dissolved gum, and beat them in the mortar for good beating, and near line with that a drink of water from the woman, the bottom pus of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that one sneeze in warm water, so that she can achieve her flanks.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts you've left of her have hardened, then make her subfumigate with myrtle and sub-place that one to her.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you've sub-fumigated her for an hour, then make her sneeze on a stool, and near make that one sneeze and extend her mouth, and lift from that, and press the lowest part of her abdomen slightly, so that the fetus can come out quickly.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Emergence of the fetus on its buttocks and its parts.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus emerges in this manner, then you use your hands to gently insert its parts little by little; and near the woman should be lying on her back, and her legs in the air, and those should be stretched out towards the bed, and her parts should comply.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And near press gently on her abdomen little by little, and near extract that which is left of her legs between her breasts until it's prepared in the lowest part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus isn't coming out quickly, then lift her legs and move those vigorously, and near press gently what's on her flanks little by little so that the fetus can reach its parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And near insert her parts and make the fetus equal little by little, and command the woman to expel it so that the fetus can come out quickly.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Lateral emergence of the fetus hanging one of its parts.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It should be done by reducing her hand, but if you can't reduce that one, then lift the woman and let that one go.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it can't go on its own, then have her lie on the bed, and compress her thighs with strong squeezing, and near administer remedies made from remedies as I've recommended.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if it has come to the birth, then perform that surgery on the belly, and proceed by studying the reduction of her hand, and conduct the operation according to natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to close herself as soon as she is freed from pain.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Positioning of the fetus over the belly expands its hands and the surface beneath it is double that of its mother's.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Guide the midwife to have her hand on the fetus and gradually turn that little one bit by bit, making it easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when they are equal, then place your hand on that which we recommended of oil and of mucus.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And guide her to turn that little one gradually, and once this is done, then have her perform surgery on a belly, and command her to be tilted over the right side, and guide her to close herself up; and make her sneeze as required.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Extraction of the prepared fetus from the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the fetus descends into horror of the mother according to this manner, observe it, and then you penetrate the second on your finger inside so that moisture is evacuated.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is hanging over the face and neck of her, then you penetrate that in the umbilicus, so that it is not retained and remains.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then you force the fetus into the openings while placing that second one according to how she feels, and command the woman to close herself for several times, and he shall be freed from pain immediately if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Extraction of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are usually born prematurely, and some never reach three or four months, but this is unusual and confusing; mostly they are caused by natural reasons, not illness.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count them, whether they are in pairs or singletons, separated by the umbilical cord. They distinguish those among the ligaments around each of these. Some are born prematurely like a fetus by natural birth quite quickly, and some remain for several days due to an impossible birth as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some are difficult among them, you must perform the birth and resort to the figures of unnatural births that we have discussed. Then treat those accordingly as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and performs what makes it easier and with subtlety, and in delay, and according to every figure as she has been prepared by nature leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Repetition of what forms within the womb from embryos and aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some burns are made in the mother one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, at which point you should verify that a woman who aborts produces one, and another person all of them, which is caused by measurement of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this is done according to what is in the midwifery science that leads to such a small likeness of that, and consequently pauses itself on that as long as she feels it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On extracting the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you attend to a dead fetus in accordance with what we have discussed in the section of medication and it is not expelled by itself, then consider whether the woman has good health and is not prone to any of the accidents that cause loss for her.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then observe that the woman is lying on her back, with her head inclined downwards and her thighs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should have that part of two sides or is bound on her back, so that her body does not extend downwards during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you moisten the mother's mouth with oil and moisture, as well as high mucus and fenugreek seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And apply oil and mucus to the midwife's hand as well, then position her hand in convenience for the mother, and arrange her location on which she can place her fingers under the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And locate conveniently in this: then consider if the fetus is prepared to descend on its head, and then place your fingers under its buttocks, or around its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or let it be on her chin, or at its belly button, or near its back locations, or leave its hipbones.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the descent is on its feet, then in the buttocks, or midway down its back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And observe that your finger is on her right hand, pause the curvature of it in that location which is between the last two fingers of her left hand, position your hand in convenience and place your finger in one of those locations we've mentioned, so that it can reach the lower cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then position and place another finger, or third if necessary, so that there is equal pressure, and not extension according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And apply gentle force to all parts, so that the passage is eased as it is done in teeth during extraction.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And observe that the extension should be softened between them; and if any part of it is retained, then observe that the midwife applies some of her fingers with oil and uses them skillfully, turning around those parts that are being retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	When the belly's exit is blocked outside, then let the intestines be released into any place where it might be pus; and do this until the entire belly is out.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If my hand is trapped in front of the other, and it's not possible to return it through constriction, then let a cloth wrap around that; and remove it until everything is out, and cut it either at the junction of the hand or on the side.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do this for the other hand and both feet as well.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the belly is large, or if it becomes constricted in the umbilical region, or if there's water trapped in the head, then let something insert between the two halves of the spine and cut through the head to drain out the water, or find an instrument named "alundat," which has a shape similar to other instruments in the surgical cap, which is nearby this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Similarly do this if the belly has naturally a large head: and then let something cut through that with an awl, or take hold of it like "alunda" as we have said; and remove the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is stuck and constricted behind the gullet, then let it be cut through until the moisture in the feet is dissolved.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If there's no complication, nor any obstruction at the umbilical region, then you should cut through the head right away as long as it is feasible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the intestines are twisted or in lymph, then let you pierce that through where flows the moisture that is within it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the belly is above its feet, then the movement of it is slight and the direction towards the mother's mouth is slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If it's constricted you should move the belly and feet, then let you remove that with cloth which will envelop your hand, and cut through the belly and feet until you reach what is inside them.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other limbs remain in place and return to its head, then let the left hand enter the mother's mouth; but if the mother's mouth is open, then let the hand enter through the belly button region, wrap around that head, and pull it with both hands into the mother's mouth, and let a finger or two enter in, and pull them.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted due to an abscess, then let it not be inflated over it; before that, you should prepare to administer emollient and oily substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply poultices; and continue with waters that soothe and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the belly is on its side, then if possible it should be pierced: and let what we have said be administered to the living belly.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then let it be cut with sharp tools, and removed.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And make sure to leave no cause for the second one inside.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then let you administer what we have said about the treatment of abscesses that occur from the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if pus discharge occurs, then let it be treated with restorative waters and apply the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have indeed seen a woman in her womb who had an unborn dead fetus, and then about that area there was another pregnancy taken on, and the fetus became dead again.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to him for a long time that an abscess occurred in his belly; and it inflated until the fetus was swollen, and began to move.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called upon for his treatment, and I treated him for a long time, and the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	So I placed some strong-pulling poultices on him and extracted an animal bone from him, and after several days, extracted another bone; and I was very amazed, as there is no bone in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I realized that they were bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	And then I cleaned the wound, extracted bone mush from him, found a woman's bones in her abdominal arrangements, and had already seen such things for a long time, moved one of his arms by a little.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not consider it strange, but rather that in this there is knowledge and assistance with what the surgeon does with his hands for treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Regarding the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of inversion through which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of a stretcher on which they are equalized, to this equality two stirrups at the ends of two futs.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	Indeed, let this stirrup be more subtle in terms of rigidity, and made or of metal or of wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the width of each rod be two fingers and the margin of both on either side is one finger; and the length of each is a hand and half; and in the middle location of two rods there are two attachments for those metal rods which are already fixed, from which the length is about a hand plus a little, and the width of each is about two fingers, or a little less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two enhancements should be inserted in the mother's mouth so that she opens up when you rotate the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Form another similar kind of that subtle and lighter pus:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made from the handles of tongs or forceps according to their shape.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the extremity of them are two enhancements just like this one, and the length of those enhancements is about a palm, and the width of each is two inches.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to have that open the mother, then you make the female bend her knees while hanging her feet down, and open that which is between the patient's thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then, open your hand with that tool as you would use a pair of scissors equally according to the amount you want from the opening of the mother's mouth while the measurer does whatever you desire.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of dizziness, which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impulsion, in which the fetus is being pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of breech, in which the large head is presented.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to tongs with teeth at the end, just like this one, and sometimes a longer version of this is made as long as forceps according to this form, just like this one, which has teeth such as saw teeth on which it is inserted and presented.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of breech (twins):
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a fetus with one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a fetus with two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of tongs, where the teeth are closed at which the head of the fetus is presented.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a fetus with two extremities, at which the head is severed:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The form of two backbones lying side by side:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are practiced, and when there are more species of that among them, and they are prepared by the artisans, as much lighter to their operation and as much more suitable you should have the people for their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And don't use those instruments already that whatever you need is unavoidable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Regarding the extraction of the second one.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second one is being retained, you should proceed to delivery. Then command the mother to hold her breath, and then have her perform a sneeze under the condition, pressing your hand on her mouth and her nostrils, and if she sneezes out as a result, that's good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a bowl and puncture in the lid one hole and insert under that into herbs while pressing her mother's mouth with it, just like a hot and rough remedy and anethole and chamomile and saffron and powdered Arabic gum and cassia stick and St. John's wort.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the bowl, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a funnel of castor oil in the mother's mouth, and let that vaporize inside her so it fills the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then have her perform a sneeze as we've said, and the second one will be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	May if this treatment doesn't succeed and doesn't work quickly, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in safflower oil or in a mixture of almonds, and have that immersed inside her until she finds the second one, and as soon as you find it, take it and pull it out slowly step by step. If it is attached near the mother's belly, then have her place her hand according to what we've recommended, and when she has found the second one, extract it little by little according to rectitude so that the mother doesn't faint due to the strong urge.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Afterwards, ensure she is relaxed on her right and left sides for ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust in the amount of urge, which she would follow and escape from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted, as we've already recommended treatment with sneezing and with medicinal bowl herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	And if it isn't expelled by all the causes that we've recommended, then guard yourself not to exhaust on that in repetition of abstraction. However, ensure what comes out from her mouth into the mother's thigh lies on the female's side, and then smear that with grease and tetraformula; for which one will make it dissolve over a few days and become expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	And when it occurs, there's an unpleasant smell going up to the head and stomach, and this irritates the mother; then ensure that sub-smokes and suitable things are administered under these circumstances.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Just like the ancients, they used sub-smoke from nettle and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of an instrument where the female is sub-smoked for the retention of menstrual flow and the second one:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made from willow or rosewood.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the subtle end is placed under the chest and the wide end over the fire, and the sub-smoke is placed above the fire's arms.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And let that be where that sub-smoke is consumed and another one follows.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Regarding the treatment of an unperforated infant's bottom.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Infants do not fart and their buttocks do not get pierced, which are now tender and inflamed.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then direct the midwife to pierce that small area with her finger; if not, pierce it with a sharp needle and make sure it doesn't touch the wound.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place over that piece of wet wool in vinegar and heat; and apply something inside that is clean.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear it's inflamed, then put a tube in the mouth for several days, and keep it until the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if there is inflammation of the buttocks due to consolidation of infection or abscess; then remove this consolidation, and proceed with treatment as we have said about treatment and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that occur.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the region of leaving pus low, they are small and coarse. They often appear near the anus or in the space between one part of the buttocks.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or spots.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that pus becomes old and moist white, or has a subtle rash, sometimes some of these lesions penetrate them.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known as such because of the way they develop from them by ejection and through wind. Sometimes some patients have difficulty in ejection, and forcefully it becomes like a worm.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas develop in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and others penetrate from between the thighs into the grooves of the anus.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And the one known as a penetrating fistula into the anus and non-penetrating is that you insert your finger in the anus, and introduce a subtle probe of wood or iron into the fistula when there is no obstruction.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is obstruction in that, then insert a subtle lead or horsehair probe inside where you feel the probe or hair on your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that or there is no cause for ejection, elimination, or wind, as we have said, then know it's non-penetrating, and now take care of the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then its significance is that it causes urine discharge from that and prevents this; so that the place where medicine has been applied becomes consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	And if it penetrates into the space between the thighs or into bone causing pain in the vessel, then this is a sign that the probe goes inside here if there is no obstruction into the bone and pain in the vessel of the region; and that pus comes out continuously from this; and it doesn't help with this medicine, nor does it harden with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all these penetrating fistulas, there is not a cure for everything, and the treatment of those involves hard work and the expertise of surgeons on which they operate.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And in that which is non-penetrating and not old, healing with iron is awaited according to what I will advise you, and what I already know and practice.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And that is for the patient to lie with your hands under their buttocks and elevate their legs inside them, have their thighs inclined towards the belly of the patient, and introduce a lead or horsehair probe into the fistula if there's obstruction, knowing where the probe goes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that is the belly around the anus, then remove your finger which you have inserted there into the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel that the probe has already emerged by itself through your finger, or between your finger and that wall or flesh, then you will definitely know that this is a penetrating fistula; and from now on don't work on this, as it doesn't have healing properties, just like we said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, some would say that it is cured in certain patients with particular conditions.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And concerning the treatment for which youth is expected in them, you should ignite a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula as previously explained, and insert that ignited part into the fistula until it touches around the anus; and then do this twice or three times until you know that all those fleshly parts adhered due to the inflammation resemble feathers.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that with warm bandages wrapped around it until all those parts that are adhered can heal. And also treat that with medicines to generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, well done; and otherwise, from now on it is not considered cured for another treatment within a time frame.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters and does not reach your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe that is thinly covered with flesh or muscle, and sometimes within this fistula where it touches the surface of the prostate gland, then dry out the prostate gland from the beginning of the fistula, and see if it dries at the probe, and is inside the fistula until the drying reaches the spot where the tip of the probe goes and through the probe it is released and flows.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clarify those fistula flesh parts which resemble the pipe of goose feather and do not break from any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if there's a discharge of pus many times when you're inside those parts, then let it be and from the pus use a slightly sharper instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, for the cauterization by fire improves these adhered parts and cuts off pus excess.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And if there are inflammations wrapped in bandages or caused by bleeding within the affected area, then immediately treat them with ointments for hard flesh that heal and strengthen.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And in the medicines which involve restriction and excision; when then is restored, it has been healed and there are no more repetitions.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula already penetrates into the prostate of the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then intervene with your finger in the anus and inquire about it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you try it and between you and her is either a bone or flesh, and it is prone to penetration, then there's no operation in her but according to the path of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	That cause should be administered to her in three ways: either cauterize that as we have said; or dry out that inside until you find the cavity of it so that it is possible for you to intervene and the healing can occur naturally; and do not disturb the drying process lest the wet content of the pus contains the body, and you follow the flow of her situation according to your will. Then treat it as we have said that strength comes with healing; or lengthen that gradually and remove that pus that you dry inside close to the anus, just as we said, or on the attempt or with another sharp tool, then modify those flesh fistulas which are in the drying section where you can puncture through; and strive to restore the entire lesion at this point, and if the wounds above do not heal and continue the open fistula at the part of the anus, and it lets out pus more lightly through the body.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is finished according to this method: when you insert your finger into the fistula, and on the left side of the anus near the body's surface along the seam and at the edge of the anus, then take hold of the punctured extremity, which works like a needle when preparing stitches in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that seam wrapped in three seams or around it; and then insert your finger into the seam inside the fistula until you find its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If you are penetrating into the edge of the anus inside, then you extract that thread this way as you insert your finger in the anus; and pull out the end of the thread and adjust both ends at once, tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two. And when the thread penetrates more deeply into the flesh, strengthen that part between those tissues which are between the two ends of the thread and can fit together.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the lesion so that it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way that you have prepared, but rather from inside the prostate, which should not be done by you to prevent the pus. And then proceed with it so that it can be healed internally.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the wound spike for what is slit through the fistula: The curvature of which is quite sharp and the other part is not, so that you do not proceed with something unnecessary as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Sewing thread for hemorrhoids where there's bleeding in the initial stages of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids can occur in two ways; either they resemble charcoal inside the anus or they appear like fat from dried fruit.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those they are small and large, with bleeding from those at the time being one, and they are spots, and outside the anus, and at the ends of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are inside the anus follow a few moist conditions, with water being yellow or a little blood in continuous body fluid, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is to command the body to relax and squeeze internally so that the anus releases and the hemorrhoids become visible to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you cauterize and suspend with threads or whatever you have those on your nail, and then proceed to cut the veins.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the threads are not in those due to their moisture and softness of those, then take those with rough fabric or with linen or woolen cloth, remove them with your fingers, and then cut those and apply some powdered remedies close to the location, so they act instead of cauterization; or cauterize those as previously described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat those with another kind of treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not respond to expulsion, then anoint the body with oil in which there is a small bite, and wash it with that which is inside the anus so that it allows for a slight expulsion when the body is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is minor, and you should take them with your nail, or you could take them with a thread, cut them, and then treat those as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you have cut, take care that when you administer stitches as follows: take a wrapped thread and insert it into the needle and then pull out the hemorrhoids from their sides. Make it penetrate into the other part's edge with the needle; wrap both ends of the thread around the seam leaving space for the needle, and do this longitudinally; strengthen the hemorrhoid with a tight stitch, then pinch the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leaving one out, so that the excess of the sick man's blood will flow from that.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place over the buttocks a cloth draped in greased oil or in gauze; and place that one above the kidneys, and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then place that inside the box; and when she is released, treat those with ointment or with another form of treatment until she is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment for abscesses.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Discharges occur due to surgical incision or due to constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are old and no longer work in that medicine, then dig out where you diagnose those at the tip of the spine or under your nail so that dampness can be done and the pus is expelled from there, which prevents consolidation; and treat them until they consolidate.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you observe those with much pus that the first enters and causes inflammation, causing abrasions; then treat them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment for abscesses, this is the key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Understand that to drain pus is the key, not just any color resembling a piece of cuttlefish, and it's done throughout the body, especially in the limbs and hands, and for those with pain you should guide your treatment.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then remove whatever is in the circuit of pus, and keep it on the thumbs or on the side, and eradicate it from its origin; then treat that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize following what is done in its head.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	True warts are small lumps with a hard pustular surface on the body's surface, and discharges occur in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And for treatment, you should extend and incise that, or open that with a knife or under the skin until it comes out.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize that, as we said before, with fire or with quick medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And after they have been eradicated both inside and outside using the tool I told you about.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Ants are small lumps covered or with a large pustular surface on the body's skin, it moves in the uterus, and when you touch that, it stings like an ant bite, and they occur around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And for treatment of this, you should use a silver or horn needle and ensure it is strong. Place that over the ant as if it's enclosed within the circle of the needle near the place where its roots are; then move your hand around the needle until you incise what's in the circuit of the ant, placing that under the skin, and eradicate the ant from its origin.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do this with an iron or steel needle according to this method:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Take the part above the needle, pulling it finely, silently (meaning undrilled), wrapped around it, on which there appears to be a removal of its appearance and the rotation of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the ant according to what was said before in the cauterization of ants at the site of the cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Regarding the form of the instruments that are used to give communion.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some discharges are given communion using silver or tin or melted iron or hammered metal instruments. Some discharges are given by those small and large instruments depending on which ones you administer, so that the one administered in treating small children should be small; and from those whose buttocks are bruised or painful, the communions of these should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of the large communion and few:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the communion tube above where the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and at that point where the bag is tied, it should be in such a position as sometimes.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the pus deposit, which enters the anus, should be closed (meaning not opened) move like a lion backwards; and at one side of the middle part there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the size of the hole according to the thickness of the hairs and thick pus is small.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which medicinal substances of bladder from animal or sheep skin are placed, and its depth is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced by small holes as they are turned; and the size of the space which is between the holes is the thickness of this.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those holes a strong hot iron of ten iron needles or about this size; and adjust that bag to it; when the bag is placed in this, it should be straight in the tip of the communion between two points with strong constriction, and then give communion on each hole: The quality of giving communion here is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be hot according to the tolerance capacity of the patient; take care not to make too much or too little.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should lie on their back, raise their thighs and place one of them under which is where men or a pillow would be; and apply oil or egg white or fenugreek or garlic paste around the cautery area; then insert this into the anus with ease, and when the minister takes the bag, they squeeze it twice and forcefully until all that was in the communion has been expelled from the intestine; then remove the communion and the patient raises their thighs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if medicine forces one to abstain, bear it as much as you can; and if sleep deprives one of the entire night, it is better in old age.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	Better if you cure him of the stomach disorders and his illness makes him suffer, then you will repeatedly apply the cautery until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are ulcers or abscesses in the buttocks, then his medicine is delicate and strong, among those medicines which make children suffer.
De curacio de las plaguas.	For the treatment of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already stated in the division of the treatment of the plagues that which was suitable for free people, and thus I also describe the treatment of those by me and according to medicine following its proper order.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	So I say that the plagues are diversified according to how they cause the plagues and according to the place on which the plaques fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which metal injuries are caused to form plagues are as follows: through fire damage, or incision of space or of bone, or打击 with a spear, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or resembling those due to metal injuries.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Better are the plagues that occur in the body areas as follows: like the headache plague, or on the neck, or the leg, or the stomach, or the thigh, and resembling those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the treatment of some plagues for which you should pause that reasoning and rule on the others.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I begin with simple head plagues, for which the memory of compound ones will come at the beginning of the next chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So I say that when a simple head plague occurs and is not a fracture, then you should consider: if it's due to fire or something resembling fire, and has caused an inflammation throughout the body only, this is a major head plague and you fear for his patient's possible development of an abscess. In that case, you apply hot and leech therapy immediately; don't delay this treatment; and remove blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other contraindication prevents leeching, especially if the pus that comes out of the plague is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And for the bleeding of the opposite side from the affected part; and guard your patient against overeating, drinking too much, and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	Better if you prohibit any cause from occurring, then it should be reduced in food and not approach meat or drink.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause about the plague, if to him an abscess develops, use oil made from crushed herbs or in wine where it has a healing effect.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Better if you are sure of the abscess formation, then pause about the plague, if it is recent from his pus and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend for treatment.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed, then pause about some ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	Better if the plague is large or due to incision and something resembling it, and his patient's lips are not adjusted with pins, then adjust those according to how I recommend for their suture.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	Better if the plague has already been discovered from bone and flesh penetration, but it is not retention of his patient's substance only a small suspension; then you should incise that and treat the plague with medicines and restore the flesh in place of inflammation; command your patient to eat dishes where there is a taste: caps and forms like them until they are composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find decay in the bone and does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise all that part and let it heal, treating that area.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	Better if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur and it is not separated by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery; if you find that it is unincised, then you should incise it with forceps, or tie it; and if necessity compels you to ensure that what we have said does not apply, then you should cauterize before the blood flow stops.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is slight; consider that you should sprinkle this powder over them, which solidifies the ground before air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of this powder is as follows: take one part of oil from an onion, two parts of dragon's blood, three parts of unextinguished charcoal; mix all together and sift them well, and spread it over your plague until it binds properly inside and absorbs thereupon, then solidifies with some blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then carefully removes that over the powders and lays it down, not stirring it while still like this, so that your patient's medicine does not disappear until he is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And some times do this alone with the cautery, when you don't have an onion and dragon's blood at hand.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical procedure is done for large plagues when you need to leave it applied over those and strengthened, and the plagues that are recent from their pus, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then it is not acceptable to place this powder at its usual position, but instead treat those with what we have said, considering that you should pause about applying some better ointments over those, or apply powders made from flour of earth mixed with water and honey until they become soupy; and then treat those with another kind of treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If it happens that you encounter a small fracture in bone, then remove this by manipulation.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I prescribe the treatment for skull fractures in cases where there is poisoning.
De las plaguas del col.	For lung diseases.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the disease occurs in the lungs, there is no difference in treatment, and for skull diseases when they are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves in the lungs are incised or an artery, if it's nerves, not in their abdomen but rather avoiding treatment with something that causes violent constriction, such as sulfur and say that it is glassy and resembles their gallstone to their nerves and constricts them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And don't let any cause of all stop it, for the substance of nerves is stopped and its continuation is to the brain, which is the pus of all parts of the body.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it's treated with gentle medicines, such as when it's washed in lukewarm water, some herbs infused in either pressed or unpressed oil, and thyme when washed in lukewarm water and the other minor burns are treated according to this manner, and ointment is applied.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, then you should perform suturing or lacerate the lips of it, and subsequently treat that with powders until healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the wound is deep or happens in its lower pus part near the surface, then puncture that at the deepest point of it.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If in the wound an artery has already been incised and a blood flow is achieved, then separate or dry that, or bind that, or apply a cautery to it if necessity compels that.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If it has already incised the ligaments of the shoulder blade or all, and saved the veins in the lungs, then adjust the lips of the chain with suturing over the shaft of the shoulder blade and do not touch that; balance that and return that to its natural shape, and strengthen that by stretching it properly, and let that heal for a few days; subsequently treat that with ointments containing constricting and stimulating substances until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the disease has already made an incision in the bone, then puncture that, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those you can from them; for what does not belong to you, let that heal inside until the wound closes, and separate it so that its removal is easier.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the disease is recent, then sprinkle over that the powder which you are advised to use.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If in the wound there is a fistula formed, then treat that with what you will remember soon in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	For lung diseases or for sores that occur between the shoulders and are formed in the middle, on the back or around the ribs.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it's an impact of a rib or a back bone, and if you measure the depth of the wound when the patient is breathing; then know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it's not deep in the wound and the disease is recent to its blood flow, then you should stop at that with the first remedy powder, and don't stretch that so as not to have the blood retained in the depth of it and return to the heart causing the patient harm; rather stop at that attractive ointment, and apply two rounds of it each day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not available to you, then stop at the opening of the wound and compress it slightly so that the fluid that is of humidity comes out; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that the fluid that is contained flows.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If it has been three days or more since the disease and no spasms or heart tremors occur, nor stiffness in the patient, then if you have good other dispositions for him, know that the wound is saved; and then treat that with baths and all other good treatments until healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the patient is justified, and he has been open for all this time, then know that a fistula has already formed; treat it accordingly in its chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the disease is due to a rib or back bone incision, and it's simple on the surface of the foot or leg, then treat that with what precedes suture, if it's large, or with powder if it's small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has already made an incision in the bone and you have dissected its parts, then twist the wound and extract those parts if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separate, then let them heal inside until the wound closes, making their extraction easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other diseases that occur in other limbs, juvenile care is like what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	For abdominal diseases.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort which occurs in the abdomen can be large, small, or intermediate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For the large ones, some herbs will incite the intestine or nerve of the intestine, so that their introduction and suture be more forceful and finer.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And for a small disruption, it is made difficult by another method, and it's clear that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you don't take care of their introduction to their place immediately, which opens up and swells because the intramural part of it becomes difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best intervention is to migrate, for in that case it's not difficult to return the hernia, similarly to what's difficult in the two previously mentioned species.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	Know that there are four methods for sewing the abdomen, but two stitches are common and suit the stitches of other body parts.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two others, which are specific to their own, communicate with the other illnesses, but however, they are more specific in the stitch of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I advise you on each exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So say that when the illness is small and some cause of the hernia is in that place, making it difficult to reduce it, then this situation falls into one of the two methods: either due to the smallness of the disruption as we've said, or when the hernia is inflamed by the cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when this happens, you should cut that away by soaking a sponge in hot water for a moment, or taking it in cold water with pepper and garlic, and apply it to the area of the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes I've found this helpful in cases of stiffness, and it's better than water alone for resolving inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when the inflammation has resolved, then you moisten the hernia with water in which garlic is boiled, for this soothes the abdominal organs due to a few causes.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	And if it is justified to soothe the abdominal organs with this treatment, then cut open the disruption slightly with a tool that has needles attached.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it's appropriate that there isn't drying, and no need to hasten its drying or cause deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the tool, dry up its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the tool has a sharp edge, and the other part is not blunt, with its tip being subtle but not as subtle as a needle, it should be somewhat blunt before that.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the illness has spread and extended beyond the hernia, you should return it according to its natural form, in its proper place; if possible, this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	And when the disruption is broad, and it's in the lower part of the abdomen, you should have the patient lie on their back, with their legs higher than their head; and if it's in the upper part of the abdomen, then place the head and feet higher than the sides.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two abdominal parts, then pause your understanding and consideration at this time so that the part where the illness is occurs more than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus, you should administer this treatment in large illnesses and in minor illnesses.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small illnesses, use your prepared remedy and make sure the one who applies it is among your most skilled, so they have the entire disruption under their hand and adjust the folds of the skin; and approximately uncovering from this to that reveals some cause for another need.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of sewing: one where you take the needle, or count the size of the needle according to the breadth of the illness; then leave from the end of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle once, or more than if you put a pin in both ends of the thread; under that circumstance make it penetrate into that part; and you have already added two ends of the thread and two sides of the thread, and they are made four turns.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen the needle twice in the circuit of the thread, and sometimes from both sides, and add the two folds and the illness by a decent addition; and smooth the thickness of this one and put another needle there, and bind that with yarn just as you did with the first needle; and don't stop doing this when it's necessary with the needles until you've completed all the contraction of the illness.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be of medium coarseness and subtlety, for subtle needles more gently cut into the flesh; and the thicker ones are difficult in the thread, so you should make them slightly medium-coarse in subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And don't let the needle be fastened at both ends of the thread close together, for so that the flesh is not cut gently and that the illness heals before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And don't extend the stitches unnecessarily so that the illness doesn't prevent its consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the ends of the needles so that they don't slip from under the patient's back; place powdered substances over the stitches from all sides, which have the ends of the needles; leave them until you know that the illness has already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of stitching with needles in this manner are more suitable for small illnesses, where even in the sewing just one needle or two around them is sufficient.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the second sewing is normal: and you should administer during sewing the four ends, of the thread and two sides of the skin, in one place, with a needle where the yarn is enveloped equally in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when you have pierced these four extremities with the needle, return the needle from that midpoint of which it started, so that the pus sack from that lower part rises to the wound, and the suture follows as a second stitch on the cloth, where the cloths are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And between each stitch, pause for the amount of force needed for the thread.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch is how humans do it.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And this is the way they sewed up the wound that happened to a man in his abdomen where he was wounded by a thorn, and it was the rupture of the largest abdominal wound, which was situated about two palms away from my belly bone; it was the rupture in the middle of the member; then I returned that deposit after the intestine had been exposed through the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in about fifteen days or so, and treated that way until it healed; and afterwards he rested with poultices for several months, and then was able to resume his activities.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that it was not healing; and by miracle rather than medicine, since I did not treat him with ointment, which is in the place where no ointment or any medicine would be effective, simply applying on the wound like for days twice and frequent washing with honey water ended up healing.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	I may tell you two types of my own suture according to Paul's narrative.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And this is how you start with the suture at the base of the cord, and insert the needle from the outside to the inside part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And when the needle penetrates into the cord and brings in several points straight and longitudinally of the whole body, let the tip of the thread be at the place where you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate into the other end from the inside part to the outside part on the other end of the body.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, then you make another penetration in the same midpoint of the body part from the outside to the inside; let the tip of the thread be at this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other end of the inside part from the outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make that penetration through your own needle, so that this one also goes into the thread at the tip of the body which is in the place inside where all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And from this side start, sew it at the tip that is at the end of the thread which goes into the body in the other side, and remove the needle from the cord where it penetrated, then join that to that cord and continue sewing at the end of the body which is on this side of the tip; and remove that one from the cord which comes from that part.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and again, and repeat this once or twice in between which you sew everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the whole of this method of sewing is that you sew with stitches on the skin where you stitch the skin. So that you sew the body once from the part of the end of the cord, and let that other stitch wait until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And the second type of my own sewing is called Gualia's method, which was described by him and recommended to him; that is to sew it according to similarity where some doctors stitch it like this, so they add all parts to their corresponding part as nature dictates; they apply the tip of another from them and the tip of the body on the other end of them, and this is done according to what I advised you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	And when you place the needle at the tip of the body near the outside part, make it penetrate into the inside part in that sole, and let go of two ends of the thread; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two ends of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn each of them, and make some from the inside part penetrate into the outside part in two ends of the body other than those on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this way of sewing is better than common light sewing, and it is a type of sewing that anticipates memory.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the method by Gualia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And thus some might say, the belly's sewing is corrected with two needles, so that you insert into each of these one thread, and start with the insertion of a needle from which you must do, then make it penetrate into the other side according to the sewing of those that equalize the bodies.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when a rupture is in the middle of the belly, then this sewing of it is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the treatment for wound care is judgment for the other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	And this is the reason that when you catch the wound fresh at its root before the air changes it, and return the intestine and sew it up properly, then rest on that carneous powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already changed the wound, then rest on that several ointments which are at your disposal until they harden and cleanse the pus, become consolidated and heal; and treat it like the treatment for other wounds until it heals.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you are not present with the remedies, then pause on that just now, as it begins to bleed and exude pus, and change that twice a day, like what you were taught, until you are healed. When you no longer need other medications in various situations when the illnesses are simple,
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the infection might spread to the main limbs, then consider immersing wool in oil of good quality or in rubbed oil, and place this on the circuits located between the joints and leave them there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in their intestines, which happens under these circumstances, then apply a black stinging ointment, especially if the inflammation is localized in the intestine and causes an incision penetrating inside its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that what comes from the large intestine is a light pus for healing, and that which comes from the subtle intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal that which is called "gallbladder" when it catches an illness that affects it completely; this is due to the large number of veins within it and their vastness in those, as well as the subtlety of its body and proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you are dealing with is the fabric of the illness, and if you obtain that recently, reduce that according to your judgement on how to return the intestines evenly.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has spread within you and is now in a red or black state, then strengthen that with a bandage on the place where it is degraded in you, so that fluids of healing can come through, for there are veins and arteries in the tissue.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then cut that which is another piece of ligament, and hang the ends of the bandage from your position at the exit point of the illness's area, so that when you are done with it, you will be relieved of its attraction to you, and the release of the body's fluids from the illness.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Reminder of illnesses when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a disruption in the intestine and it's minor, then it might be restored in some individuals. That's why I saw him being hit by a lance in his belly with the impact causing the illness from the right side of the stomach, and the illness was old and caused a fistula, and it had weakened his digestion and expelled gas.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I pursued the treatment of him even though it wasn't in his recovery from illness, but I managed to delicately apply this until he is healed and the area is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw the place already consolidated, took note of the location that suffered from this unfortunate incident in his stomach; and did not allow any other illness to occur due to this unfortunate event, respecting their dietary habits when eating and drinking, and ensured proper hygiene by bathing and exercising according to his instructions.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And it is said by experienced ones that when an illness occurs in the intestine and it's minor, then you should handle it like this: take large leaves of herbs; then adjust both sides of the illness area and place a herb leaf with its mouth open on both sides of the illness. So when they grasp onto those and strengthen their mouth, cut off its head, which sticks and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another herb leaf near the first one, and don't stop doing this by applying leaves one after another according to the amount of the entire illness.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and heal the illness; and remove those excess parts in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and it does not harm the body through injuries.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible for the intestine to be held with a fine thread made from the intestinal thread of animals attached to you, as it's more in needle form; and you take the end of these intestine threads, if they are well cleaned, then place that end on your thread, wrapping it, then introduce this needle thread into needles and substances within that animal's intestine, and reduce that during disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of sewing with herbs is merely by way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the illness is large and broad, especially if it's in one of the subtle intestines, then it doesn't heal through minor issues but only through hope.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Regarding the treatment of hernias and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that all illnesses and abscesses when they fester and become old, cause ulcers, which are not consolidated and bleed constantly, and do not get cured. Therefore, wherever this occurs in any part of the body, it's universally named a fistula, and we call that hernia.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a true fistula is a tough, white, non-painful nodular lesion, which does not hurt and has the texture of an abdominal pain; hence, it's called that way because of its similarity to the pain caused by distension.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And there are certain individuals who have a wet condition that bleeds; and reducing mild humidity can be done within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some times this moisture causes problems, it is small, it is large, it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned this in the division, thus regarding illnesses, that every ulcer which is not healed and not naked flesh, it's only due to one of these causes: among them, one is due to poor circulation within the body; or through malice by the patient; or when there's hard flesh between the patient and the skin, preventing natural growth of flesh; or due to leg wound; or because that ulcer itself contains pus and material intertwined with the patient is of bad quality; or because the treatment was inconvenient for this illness; or when corruption occurs in the region, and it's pestilence; or due to regional properties as found in Saragossa where digestion of illnesses is difficult, and healing from abscesses is delayed due to nature; or if there's bone inside the patient, or bone tissue.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And thus I will teach you the cure for fistula, which is made through surgical operation with my own hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; some of those are fistulas that occur within major veins and arteries, or nerves, or the heart, or intestine, or bladder, or any part of the spine, or any joint made up by parts like hand and chest. And among those, there are ones that affect the proximity to the main member and resemble its shape.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And those among these fistulas that occur this way are related to the difficult recovery of ailments, and they do not receive treatment or cure, and working on that is labor and lack of knowledge.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach these places as mentioned, and you hope for its cure, and wish to understand it better, then try with tools or iron. If the fistula follows straightness, then examine that closely.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	May you also if the fistula is twisted, then investigate that with a soft lead tool. Lead in its body's lightness ascends and bends according to the twist of the fistula.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is so deep that it cannot be determined with a tool, then it's not possible for you to measure it on them.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cleanse the opening with your natural means of cleansing, for the moisture through which you cleanse that should go to the other openings and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And inquire carefully according to how you can know if there are veins or nerves involved, and whether the location of the fistula is distant or close. Whether this is a fistula with multiple openings that covers your entire strength, in which case you would question the patient thoroughly, applying pressure on the area with your hand, understanding the implications and causes related to abscesses.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have ascertained all those causes truthfully through observation, then proceed with the treatment according to your understanding: now consider whether this is a superficial fistula close by or in an easily accessible location, far from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any other places I've mentioned.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then you dry out the fistula as it was explained in its description, keeping track of that filtering process and decayed tissues, whatever has emerged from the flesh opening or any part related to it. Heal within until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	And if the fistula is of considerable depth and follows straightness, then open it as far as possible while you can, and modify that around all its decayed tissues; then apply bandages soaked in sharp medicines into it, having understood how to insert them according to iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times in areas where the sharp medicine can corrode all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it has not been healed by this method, then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of fistula is bone and you have certified this fact, then inquire about it and dry it out according to what we recommended before. If you do not find any cause related to veins or nerves or main body part as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	And if bone is revealed to you and there's corruption and blackness in the patient, then remove that area until all corruption is gone; then heal it from within while ensuring the flesh of the patient recovers properly.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it's not healed and still retains its strength as before, then you should know that you haven't eradicated all corruption completely; thus, carefully uncover this again in detail and follow the treatment method until your final strength is exerted, then proceed to restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it has healed, well done; otherwise, know that this corruption is deep within the body, which could not be treated, so you cannot do much except let it be.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is slightly corrupted or you are able to pull it out, then you would use delicate forceps suitable for this task.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if they are bones in mass, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them and do not leave any cause to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	And if there's some contradiction or inconsistency in the moisture, and during their operation you have neither fear nor error, then cut those ligaments or tissues if they are present here, and release the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	And if you're not prepared to leave the bones of your time, then rest on that wound as it should heal there, letting it stay in the vicinity of those bone tissues and ligaments, preserve the wound from consolidating and ensure the section you cut during your operation is well controlled.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	When you fear something, place your hand on their chest submerged in a soap lathered with oil, or the hand submerged in Egyptian balm, or in any of the vertebrae balsams, so that when those ligaments and bones are separated from each other by dissection, and from those excisions relief is felt.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it's a large bone such as those of the leg or thigh or similar to those, whatever has corrupted him is only on his face. Then that rottenness goes deep inside, spreading that darkness and corruption, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If what has corrupted him is a large portion, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it's necessary to close that hole completely, and then push inside where the corruption has penetrated, and then treat from within until it's solidified.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you that when dealing with a patient in their thigh, place this example and assistant over your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Treat a young man around 30 years old, who suffers pain in his thigh. The source of the matter within the body is inside the body, where the matter has reached the thigh, and it's pus from an abscess, which is a large abscess. Do not attribute the cause to an extrinsic factor.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	Then extend that period within the error of doctors until the abscess bursts and remove its liquid matter. The treatment is then carried out as soon as the change forms, making incisions on the pus orifices which all gave off pus and moisture from the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	Then the treatment of doctors lasted for more than two years, and I didn't succeed in those who knew it, but only in the art when I was called upon.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And you see the change in him and the fluids that flowed from those openings through a large vein; and already his body of that man was entirely dried out, and the color of him was lemon yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I introduced a thread into one of those openings and guided the thread to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined all the openings closely and found that they reach them from all parts of the body.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I took care and cut into one of those openings where I found a part of the bone, and removed that corrupted thing, it was already earthy, corrupted and degraded; and it had already corroded a part of the body which had penetrated to the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I tightened what was discovered by me and prepared from the bone found.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I ensured that it wasn't in the bone but that corruption which shrinks and tightens up, and I had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then, for a long time, using consolidative medicine to restore the wound, it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I repeated and found out about the bone again after the first discovery, removing continuous corruption from the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I tightened what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I did all the necessary operations for healing him and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered again on him and continued to gradually penetrate the bone little by little precisely, performing the restoration of him, but it was not restored until I penetrated around half his length, and I removed part of its marrow, and then restored that with medicines, it consolidated slightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	There is no need for repetition in the operation of him and section of him but due to the position of the intestines within him and due to his limited tolerance and weakness from death, which caused him discomfort at all times because of over-excitement leading to bad syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore, he is healed through complete recovery, nothing is instead of the hard flesh bone; his position is good within him in his body and returns his vigor; it adapts to his positions and does not oppose him in movement nor harm any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bone is prominent in a location of the body already punctured, then follow this method to remove it: take hold of that ligament and strengthen that at the end of that prominent bone, command someone else to extend that towards your side; place that piece of woolen thread thicker than the first ligament over the flesh left behind by the bone. Extend its tip so you can pull the flesh towards those remaining parts, then uncover the flesh on the location you wish to tighten so the saw doesn't cut into the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stool or table underneath the bone properly, so when you do this it doesn't prohibit using the saw that wouldn't cut through the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And have the saw cut through the corrupted area gradually on that location, so if it's inside the hollow of the corrupted bone and doesn't show up upon touch, force the other opening to make the closure.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before it's one continuous part from another, and the corruption is at the middle or in a part of him, then uncover the flesh from all parts completely; then place a stool underneath you, then make the closure of that first part where there is corruption, ensuring continuity of the closure of the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the saw should be in line with the location of the corruption just a little bit, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, cut that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if corruption is in the continuous part of two joints, then it's not due to their ratio but rather their structure.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if corruption is in the armpit of the hand or chest, it's very difficult; however, you must inquire about the corruption as to how it appears to you, and once you've identified it, treat that area according to every possible disposition which is within your capabilities, and with each case correct it according to what suits you, rather than causing harm to veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Know which are the incisors and the saws to use for this bone cutting depends on the location of the bones, the preparation of those tools, their thickness, the subtlety, size and smallness of those, and their hardness and rarity. Therefore, make sure you prepare every type of operation tool suitable for that particular operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	Know what that operation means to you regarding the type of tool you need; when you have ample study and long experience with methods in this art, and testimony on how to handle various illnesses, then having encountered these situations yourself, you should understand how to choose the appropriate tools for every kind of illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will find at the end of this chapter the number of tools which you will use, as simple as those that follow your prohibition which you will experiment on others.
Forma de serra:	Shape of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of a large other saw:
Forma de ray:	Shape of the key:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The tip of this key should follow the shape of the star-shaped key's head, and its points should resemble the points at the end of a star.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it's only necessary that when those joints are corrupted, or the mouth is large and open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of the larger knives for others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of the smaller knives:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of the lateral knives:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another saw properly made: it should have an arch higher than the point of the needle and the sharpness of its blade be in descent from the handle, and the member of its head that's pointed should be in a descending fashion.
Forma de lu:	Shape of this:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of the knives where there is a hollowing out:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another subtle knife:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another curved knives with rounded ends:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of the small razor resembling a net:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of the incisors which are used to cut bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another smaller cutting instrument:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another cutting tool; it resembles a key, and its end is like a saw. It should be found in various locations according to the proportion of bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of the key which corresponds to that which penetrates through the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and sharply pointed.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian iron, similarly to all the causes we have mentioned about razors, cutting tools and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For the ends of incisions and for securing bones in place.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The ends are pressed either due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or as you have treated that corruption with medications and the treatment fails to alleviate it, or sometimes the corruption spreads from the body part which was not touched by any cause. In such cases, understand that if you incise that body part within this range where the corruption is found, so that the patient's condition does not worsen due to death or malice that exceeds the misfortune of the body part.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that to which it happens is that the body becomes black inside where there has been a fire, or you place this darkness inside that part of the body that affects it, and it spreads throughout the entire body; therefore, make your incision in that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if it is due to a venomous cause of corruption such as from sea scorpions or snakes or murex and their like.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is in the end of the finger, then you should cut off the finger and do not allow space for the corruption to spread into your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it reaches your hand, then you should cut that part of the wrist, and do not allow space for the corruption to spread into the elbow of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it extends that far, then you should cut off the arm up to the armpit at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption goes beyond and surrounds the armpit, then that is death for the patient; another cause must be administered in this cure as much virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, do so with the chest when corruption reaches that part of the chest; then you should cut off that area near one of the nipples.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it spreads to the bottom of the chest, then you should cut out the entire chest.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	May also if it extends to the belly, then you should cut off the stomach area at the junction of the belly.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already reached into the belly, then it is not treatment but dismissal; leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of incising or sawing the body part is as follows: you strengthen one muscle in the part where you want to cut, and have another muscle over that spot. Extend your finger to the remaining parts on either side, then extend it with another muscle at their junctions; now separate the flesh between two muscles while leaving a slit open so that all the flesh can be seen; and proceed to cut or saw there.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And make sure that a sheet is placed on the patient from all sides so it doesn't touch the operation area, and that the injury goes directly to the wound with pus in the sick person.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If bleeding occurs while you are working, then you should use the cautery moderately on the affected area, or place some potent powders that restrict the blood on them; and afterwards return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there's an affected member, place it comfortably under him, and treat that area until it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you that when someone finds themselves in their foot, this accident befalls them which I and you recommend, one that happens to them with blackness in their foot under conditions similar to the ignition of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption occurs first in his little toe, spreading throughout the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares to make pus appear which will help the healing process go through his body with the intensity of what is causing him pain and discomfort, and he spreads that foot into the joint area, and heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Over a long time this corruption accident happens in the little finger of his hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it reaches me, and I properly understand the repercussion of that excess on what covers his hand with medicines, near the purification of his body; and the excess does not get reflected but begins to spread into the other fingers starting from his hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asks me to spread his hand, and I don't want to do that fearing the repercussion of that excess, rather I fear the spreading of his hand's death which was about to happen due to its toxicity.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And once he has forgotten about me, he returns to his land and I hear that the man prepared and spread his hand completely, and was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not recounted this story merely for amusement concerning this disease, but rather to provide assistance about it and its meaning which is why it's described and according to that it has been written.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Regarding the cure of inflammations and the quality of the enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When gangrene occurs in fleshly limbs and the area of the gangrene extends until it accumulates pus, then it bursts and perforates, and the pus escapes from him, leaving the location empty as if it was a vessel, and the wound that opens up is covered by thin cloth, and it does not reach deeper corruption, nor spreads into bones or nerves or muscles, it is called an abscess, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the area extends until corruption starts in some member, then it is called a fistula and I cannot describe that.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is to spread that wound completely as if it were being rolled out, especially when it's thin like cloth, and you make sure not to stick to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	And if you hope that the wound sticks and that this corruption hasn't reached deeper consequences, then you treat it with enemas.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider it as an abscess; if it's large, and the arm that smells is of fat scent, then you treat it with an Egyptian enema made from oil and vinegar mixed in equal parts, which are placed in a container, and they're heated over fire until the medicine boils and reaches honey-like consistency.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And afterwards you take what's necessary from him and dissolves it in water and honey; and treat with that the abscess, strengthen his opening, and let the medicine stay in him for the duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And afterwards extract that with care; and do this for several days until the abscess is purified and his pus is increased.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And in some occasions you treat with ash water when this medicine is not available to you; and you take the ashes of oak, and put it into water; then boil that solution and treat with it the area where the abscess is, until you confirm that the abscess has disappeared.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if his toxicity doesn't tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water of ash, then you treat with water and honey where it's mixed with strained vinegar; and treat with that with vinegar and honey mixed together; for honey has properties to purify and cleanse, and vinegar makes it stick to the abscesses, especially when there's excess of coagulation and drying in vinegar.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And as you do this for some occasions and confirm that the pus has increased, then treat with what causes birth in him.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take from diaphanosanguis oil and dissolve that with rubbed oil and vinegar; or you treat with some medicines and other ointments whose properties I have written about in the manuscript of ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the abscess is wide in which no catheter for enemas can be inserted, then you gradually enlarge that with a small iron tool, and pause on him with a cloth wrapped around it dipped in Egyptian ointment or basil ointment until it's enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the opening is wide, then you add his lips with stitches and leave him the amount in which an enema can be inserted.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the arm's opening which smells is elevated to his parts above, then dry that in the lower pus location so that the arm can flow into it. For when the arm is compressed within the abscess cavity, meat will be generated in him.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the bone's edge of pus as desired, then pierce and prepare the limb for the procedure where the arm flows from him lightly according to your ability and so that no cause of the arm is held back in him.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take reinforcing medicines that are placed over the sinus in the area you want, extending those above the lint cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such size that it facilitates communication with all the sinus; then, cut with scissors in the right side of the sinus opening a wider but shallow incision. And extend over another piece of lint the ointments according to the amount of this incision, and place this over him far from the sinus opening so as to allow for easy flow of his arm's movement and not let the cloth be large but only some days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May that which is over the sinus opening be adjusted at all times to prevent anything from restricting his arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so you may know if what flows from his arm is much or little, whether it is absorbed or not, whether it digests or does not digest.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And always consider the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is in a localized abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is extended in this manner, you observe the material that is being discharged over the sinus opening has adhered, or if it shows proper adherence. Then you may remove it gradually or replace it daily, and when removing the wound, then change the dressing to another one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May it be that from the sinus there is a large space for the virus to spread, then do not despair of the patient's adherence, as his healing progresses, and such are those who take longer to regenerate tissue in their wounds. This applies particularly to those where the opposite action occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if for several days the arm remains indigest from the sinus, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if there is a delayed adherence of the sinus and it is due to prolonged treatment, then adjust in drying out the medicines. And if the medicines are wet through their substance and lose their efficacy, let them be dried as well like ointments dyaffinicon, when there is excessive addition of zinc involved.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best way at the end of what needs to be treated is to take dyaffinicon ointment and dissolve it in rubbed oil, apply this on his journey's path with its substance equivalent, then apply it there, use this method.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it already imitates that action when there is no arm involved, dyaffinicon ointment with honey when rubbed in causing congestion, use this on him; or take myrrh and aloes and blend them together, then apply all of this heated over the honey, then spread this on a cloth and press this onto the sinus; and spread this on the honey which has been rubbed in causing congestion, then crush this into powder on the cloth and press this.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some times these remedies are applied on the patient's long tongue and the wisdom of celestial lilies (and those are celestial lilies), flour from ashes and centaurian herb, use any of these simple remedies or mix them together, grind these finely, then apply the honeyed mixture over them; and use this on him.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus persists and is not cured by this treatment, then you know that corruption is within him, and already there might be inquiry in his bones or in other hard members or in the joints; then you treat it with a tuberculous disease cure, as previously mentioned.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the treatment of skin eruptions and thinned nails, rubbing injuries, and insertion of a finger incisions, and sections.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an abscess that affects the nail of any finger or toe on either hand or foot, and it affects other fingers to some extent. If it persists and its treatment is difficult, or if it turns into another abscess, or gets corrupted, then you allow his arm to corrode the base of the nail, weaken the whole of that part, and let its corruption reach inside the bone causing an unpleasant smell, until this ends up rotting the tip of that finger, and its color becomes black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that as we've explained in the division and if your treatment doesn't seem to work, then dig with iron all the excess that has gathered under the nail and proceed to cauterize the wound near this, for quick healing is beneficial in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the protrusions of the nail's tissue have already invaded the flesh towards the parts inside it, then start to pierce it and guide this process. Then you must place a fine thread at the angle that pierces the flesh, push this and insert some flesh with ease, pause where there remains a bit of flesh from the ointment of burning corrosives which gets remade; and proceed to treat it with ointments until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if corruption has already invaded the bone, then you must dig into that bone and extract it, because nothing heals when there is corrupt bone within him.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption have spread in the finger, then you must pierce that at one of its joints according to where his memory presses, and proceed to treat it inside until it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If pain is felt under the nail due to impact or irritation, and the pain is intense, then at that point cut into the patient's foot with your knife, and then remove the nail using sharp cuts on the edge of the incision downwards towards the toe, and make sure not to let the cut reach the flesh beneath the nail which would cause severe pain to the patient and lead to the formation of excess tissue in that area; and then treat that area with care as it will be painful.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Here is the translation:
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And such is natural in the joint area, or it's the nature of it in some knuckles of the foot.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	The one that is natural in some knuckles of the foot isn't bad, whereas the one that is soft in joint areas causes pain.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those that are naturally fleshly, the cut is gentle; you should make your incision across the part of it on the side of the cut.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	The one that is natural in the joint area has a difficult healing process; therefore, watch out for its removal.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the case that is natural in the foot, cut where you make your first incision into its flesh at an oval opening into the bone, and then proceed to operate with one of those round saws suitable for this task. Make sure to treat that area until it heals properly.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	The consolidation you experience between the joints or due to the natural development of the human body causing pain, or due to the consolidation of sickness, fire burn, or similarity, then cut where the consolidation occurs allowing the feet to return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place between their sheets what you have rubbed with oil to prevent them from being consolidated lightly, or separate among those, or insert a thin sheet of lead between which will consolidate according to the cut.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly, if consolidation occurs on some feet in the palm area, then you should dry that consolidation according to its preparation and make it conform to the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From incisions made by vice (a type of surgical tool), they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices result in varicose veins, which are swollen and full of excess melancholic fluids. These can be found in the muscles of the body's limbs, and the main occurrence is in the legs, particularly for travelers, workers, and those who carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	So cut when you administer a heart purge for black cholera, make several incisions for forceful expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of these is according to two methods: one is to make an incision and remove that black spot, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract it completely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The operation is done according to this method: first, immerse the area in warm water until the large spot has dissolved, which becomes fluid from the area, and then strengthen the patient's chest at the bottom part of their thigh under where it meets with the leg, and proceed to bleed on a flat surface or in two, three areas with wide cuts. Then lift the black blood upwards with your right hand above the area where the limb joins the body, inside and outside until you have extracted the desired quantity of blood that's necessary, which will be absorbed by the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then instruct him to avoid consuming foods that cause black cholera.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment with bloodletting when the veins are full, and thus observe in the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of these is according to this method: if you rub the thigh area on the leg, place it in warm water and immerse the patient's leg into it until they redden and the veins become prominent; or if you are unable to bathe due to its absence, until the limb is scratched.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the bed in the right side of the vein for a section along its length or at the back of it, or from the lowest part of the leg you should reach the knee, or from the lowest point of the leg you should reach the ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then cut the bed with scissors and scrape the vein from all sides until you feel it, and when you see the fluid escaping towards darkness, you should proceed with that operation.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And once removed from the bed, you should perform this white thing which is a thread.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you insert that into the place where it should be elevated and move from under the bed, suspending it with a hook or some other tool.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry another section near that section for three fingers, and then scrape the bed from the part above the vein until you see it.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then lift that and cut in the last section near the ankle, then extract that and lift it until you pass through the second section, and then extract that from the section above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract that from the section which is more towards the top or any other of all sections, where everything is seen; then cut that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you don't follow to extract and lift it, then insert a thick double needle into that and pull it out, or insert your thread there and twist your hand in every direction until it's released.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to cause bleeding; for if it is broken, you will find it difficult to raise that part and it will come down upon the patient through that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when that whole area has escaped outwards, then place over the site of the wound a woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and oil, both mixed and unmixed, and cure it internally until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the liver is contracted with twists that are enclosed in its parts, and does not follow rectitude as we have said, then mark to make cuts over that on all parts of its twist and at the sites of enclosure of it, and hoist that up under tension inside which will raise that whole area.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful about your section; do not injure the vein and do not trouble that area, for it will be difficult to raise that part; use your caution in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the cautery when the liver is being treated:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of a horse's hoof:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be heated like the others on them nor have a sharp tip that it might trouble the vein; and it has to have thick flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would cut into the vein by its subtlety; having this, in its superfluous thickness as we said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Regarding the removal of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the hollows on low grounds, like Al-Ategi in the desert areas of Arabs and in the dry southern regions of India where there is little vegetation and where neither grass nor bushes grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And strengthening, it is generated in other parts of the body except for these hollows.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its process in them is of corruption that you leave behind the chain like a snake venom inside the body and worms and parasites and maggots generating between the chain and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the potential occurrence of this is when this vein strikes in the hollow with intense inflammation; and then that place swells; and then begins the emergence of the vein from the site of that inflammation which seems to be like a plant's root.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when you see the end coming, then command that you wrap around that one a piece of lead whose weight is equal to that of a small dragon. Within two dragons' weights, place that and lay down the lead hanging from the chest.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as there are parts outside due to her causes, envelop this with lead and take it out.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the motion is prolonged, then you should cut a part of it and envelop what remains; do not cut that from which its root is outside; for if you cut that, it will contract and enter the flesh causing abscesses and putrefaction in that area and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	And know that it should be treated gently and is extracted little by little, until it escapes from the rear of it and does not leave any cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And this vein extends in some people along their length up to my waist, and I have treated one that was as long as twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the needle into the skin and pierce that in long strands through the body, until all that is inside is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the site for several days with medicines; and afterwards cure it for the healing of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein in some cases has thickened membranes, and especially when it appears at the junction of the chest or in the chest, and causes its thickened openings, and extends from any of those openings.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And then cure it as we have said in the division and according to what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Regarding the section over worms generated under the skin, it is called cow sickness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named cow sickness in some places due to the fact that many cases are found among cattle and there is a worm inside them, one which is born between the chain and the flesh, goes up and down throughout the body, and is shown by its movement in member after member as it breaks open the chain and escapes.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is through the corruption of some fluids like when worms, snakes, roundworms, and ascariasis occur in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is found due to the mischief of this, when it travels in the body and rises to the head, then becomes strong under it and enters and destroys the ear, and in many cases becomes thickened.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to treat and extract that, do not do it if the flow and appearance of it in your feeling is not visible, then know that you should strengthen what is over it and what is left behind of it smoothly and tightness, and afterwards dry it up and extract.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is spreading in the flesh and you do not contain it, then place a cautery with fire over that area where it dwells, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it which corrupts that site as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if that spreads to the head close to the ear, then strengthen over the eyebrow with strong tightness, and afterwards dry it up over there, and extract; know that the patient should use changes in their diet with medicines evacuating bad foul fluids, and beware of foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Regarding the treatment of illness or disease above its symptoms.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This sickness is called 'nafir' in our land, and it's characterized by pain that occurs in some body parts, and later spreads from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I've already seen the second one which I'll be telling you about.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was summoned to treat a sick woman in a village, and I noticed a small swelling on her vein in the arm. After about an hour of applying heat, I saw that the swelling moved upwards like a worm climbing up, but more delicately than before, like living silver when it moves from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then you'll feel the pain at that spot and it settles in the muscle, and here stays for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it moves into the other body part leading to the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then they told me that it would move around inside their body just like what I saw, and I was extremely amazed by the transformation and speed from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen something like this in front of my eyes according to that manner, but I have seen movements for which the pain is being transformed from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it like this in humans as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I didn't consider it to be like this before because of the woman's condition, she had sensitive skin and visible veins, and in this case it appears with that sensation of the wind being transformed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this back-and-forth movement in those who are delicate and have moist skin with swollen veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want the cure for him/her, and the patient feels that pain, then it doesn't appear like it does to us according to what we've said, so you press on that area gently and let it be slightly and moistly covered by that wind's warmth, and cauterize that spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you don't feel it in your own hands, then you treat that by removing the congestion from the body and by what you're releasing as winds, and make those into pills with sulfur or similar substances.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the removal of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to species, and according to the locations in the body where they're found. Their diversity is that some of them have large points, small ones, concave ones, and dull ones; these are solid. Some have three corners, and there are those with tongues; and others with sharp ends.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And those that are according to the body members and the buttocks where I find them are in two ways: for the body members or the main body parts being concave like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, stomachs, bladder, and kidneys, with their similar characteristics; so when you come across one of these body parts and notice signs of death appearing to you, which I'll describe later, then it's advisable that you avoid extracting that arrow in those where death occurs within themselves, especially when the symptoms of this illness do not appear to you, and the arrow is not found at great depths in the body part, then extract that arrow and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the symptoms of poisoning occur when you find it in the arrow, and it penetrates the bone, causing inflammation on top of the skull due to strong acid secretion, blindness, dizziness, nausea, swelling of the tongue, spasms, confusion, vomiting caused by anger, loss of appetite, and a white humid spot similar to dust appears at the wound site, resembling the texture of meat.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if you notice these symptoms appearing to you, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow if it hasn't come out yet.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	The symptoms of the arrow when you find it in the heart are that it's close to the left breast, feels like it's embedded in hard tissue and isn't visible. The movement of the arrow resembles the movement of the wrist, and the disease spreads with a black spot causing coldness at the extremities, sweating, and fainting spells; thus you know that death descends from head to toe.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The symptoms when the arrow has pierced the lungs are a foamy blood discharge from the wound, and veins near the neck become congested, causing a change in skin color, excessive breathing, and the need to take deep breaths.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if you find the arrow in the peritoneum under the feet, then the pain is near the small ribs, causing a large and strong pain with sighing, and not all muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you find the arrow in the stomach, then there will be some undigested food symptoms from the wound area.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if you find the arrow in the belly and it's embedded there, it causes a hole at the wound site, or the skin or intestine which is ruptured, and there is no hope for treating that by extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow finds its way into the bladder and causes urine to escape externally, causing issues that lead outside of it, then experiencing pain over the body means it's fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	And for the other body parts like the face, neck, shoulders, and accessories, as well as the ribs of the back, the sternum, the knee, and similar characteristics to the body members when the arrow doesn't find a vein or artery and isn't poisonous, they are treated according to major precautions.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will advise you on this based on what I have seen of these arrows, so that you can understand about their significance in the treatment process.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This occurs when an arrow pierces the eye socket of someone's upper jaw and nose ridge, causing me to extract it from them on the opposite side. I remove their ear wax, and they recover; they do not experience damage in their jaw again.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And when another arrow pierces a Jew in their jaw in the ear area, I remove the eyelid and let it go, and the arrow was already hidden; it could not be obtained from that place but only a small tip remained which stuck to its shaft. It was a large arrow among arrows of sharp Turks, made of lion bone without any ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And if it's the Jew, and it doesn't happen to their jaw in a bad accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And when I extract another arrow from a Christian man that was stuck in the shoulder blade, it's an Arabic arrow, and that is the one with ears. Then I cut through that between two ribs, and it was already submerged in the shoulder blade of him; then I sharpened that part, and approximately extracted that arrow, and he recovers as a Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And when I extract another arrow from a man that was stuck in his belly, and considered that he would die by it; then, since we've passed through thirty days and there's no change due to his condition, I cut into the arrow and removed it, and he recovers. He doesn't experience any bad accident either.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I have seen a man in whom an arrow pierced his buttocks, the wound has healed on him, and since it's been about seven years, he removed the arrow from the surface of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I have seen a woman in whom an arrow pierced her belly; the wound has solidified inside her and is not changed in her condition, and the woman does not experience discomfort during any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I have seen another man in whom an arrow pierced his face; the wound has solidified and he removed the arrow, not suffering any pain or symptoms similar to this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extract the arrow from the king's chief's man, that was pierced in the middle of his nose and had already receded on the right side, completely hidden was the arrow.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called upon for treatment at approximately three days after the injury occurred.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I examined the wound of the arrow's injury; and then I probed that area with a needle, not feeling it; but he felt it more distinctly on his right ear, and so I assumed that that spot was at the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied a poultice to the place with the attractive and digestive properties, confirming that this location is where the poison should be eliminated so that it appears to me the location of the arrow, allowing for its removal.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And it did not occur at the significant location that you have obtained this place; I continued to apply the poultice on it for several days and there was no accident; the wound is consolidating meanwhile, and he feels the arrow in his nose after about several days inside and tells me this.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I placed acute corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it was opened, and with the needle I examined that, and probed the tip of the arrow, which stuck to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And I then adjusted during the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until it became visibly clear to me the tip of the arrow, and I spent time with this for about four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And soon after the wound had expanded, and it became possible for me to insert scissors in him, I shortened that, and did not cause any discomfort. Therefore, I did not continue to probe and manipulate with various tools methods of how to proceed, starting a day on those methods of handling under forceps, according to what each form would be at the end of the capitol, when I extracted it; then I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose would not be restored, but I did restore that and the wound is consolidated. He recovers fully as a healthy man, and he does not experience any discomfort at all.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I advise you on the quality of extracting some arrows so that you understand this rule and meaning about what I have not said, for parts of this art and definitions of that are not understandable from narration nor do they comprehend those freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the artisans compare with few about motive; and on what is presented compared to what is missing; and finds a new operation and a new tool you must follow the origin of the foreign causes in the art when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so I say that arrows are not forcefully removed from the limbs in which they are placed but according to two ways: or by piercing the location where they enter; or against the opposite side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is embedded in the location gives entry, or it's an arrow originating from a carnal place, and it's thrown and forcibly removed.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not feel any discomfort at the time of hunting, then cover that for several days until the flesh around it heals, and ease its piercing and exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly if it is placed inside and does not follow your will, then leave that alone for a few days and continue to apply pressure and move it each day, and already it has been taken out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not follow your will for a few days, then it seems that you are piercing through the path of the arrow in that hole throughout all directions within a subtle area where the location becomes enlarged with the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and has already progressed into one of the cavities of the brain, and appears at the thigh with those kinds of accidents which I've mentioned, then refrain from removing the arrow and leave it inside where his being equals that for a few days; if however the arrow penetrates to the spine, then death will not be prolonged for him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck just in the bone of the body and does not penetrate into the spine, but remains at the thigh for a few days, and does not happen to him any cause of those accidents, then you should proceed with the removal of the arrow and the treatment of him.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And if it is moved and does not follow your will for removal, then you administer travels in the path of the arrow as we have recommended, and then care for the area so that it may heal.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow has already hidden in the body's location, and is hidden from feeling, then you inquire about it with attempts, and if you feel it, then pull it with such instruments that are suitable for removal.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach him because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow shaft, and here there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then cut into the wound where it has been enlarged so that you may be able to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is in the patient's armpit where he has been pierced from all directions towards all the parts of his body; then deliver the flesh in which it is stuck from every side to all the organs that you can perform; and proceed with this, if you cannot remove the flesh at the breakage of the axilla and within the twisting of those places according to your will.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the removal of the arrow in every location where it is, then use both twisting of your hand and forceps from all directions wherever this makes it obey; and with subtle delicacy that the arrow is not broken and that it leads to a difficult extraction for you and of this removal.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot about this at your time, then leave for some days within which the parts that are in the path of it should recover, and proceed with this as later becomes eased.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And if it causes you discomfort or pain, then administer what we have said about treatment in his chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And protect your virtue from the incision of vein or nerve, or string, and administer all possible means in your manner for removing the arrow; do this with ease, calmness, speediness and firmness as I have instructed you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And then make the arrow twist by itself so that the thigh follows the figure according to which you must place the positioning of the arrow in him, for it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	And if this is not possible to you, then administer that which is possible to you through the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	And if the arrows are outside of him in opposition to the other side, or have progressed some part towards the parts outside, or if it makes the end of the arrow twist with feeling from the part above its knee and sometimes that is more prominent; then you should grasp that one; and decide on this section according to the amount when taking hold with forceps; and then pull it, as it is easily moved by your will.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it is stuck in the bone, then twist your hand against opposition where the arrow forces itself into the bone, and enlarge yourself by doing so, and then extract that one.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave that alone for some days, and proceed to extract it when there is fire.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in that one, then push that towards him.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft is stuck and you wish to administer impulse, then insert that one when it's silent, use curved instruments so that they enter in the cavity of him into the arrowhead, and then push that towards him.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	And if the arrow is concave, then push that one with strong force entering into it, for the arrow becomes eased by this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is exposed, then it seems that you should hollow out all the flesh in which the bone is, if this is possible for you, and proceed to treat that according to what suits.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the foot, or in the stomach, or in the bladder, or on the side, and it is close enough so that you can touch it with your hand, then if this is possible for you to decide about this one, then decide upon this and protect yourself from cutting a vein or nerve, and extract this one, and later stitch up the wound if necessary, and treat it until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Shape of forceps to which arrows are pulled:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let their ends be like that of a bird's beak which are made as saws when they take hold on the arrow in such a way that they do not let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from those there are special spots, large, few and mixed, depending on the quantity of the arrow's size and its slightness, as well as the breadth of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape the concave end of this extremity as it is done with the tip of a lance, so that it eases the passage of the arrow within him, and push the soft spot here:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of the soft extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	As with a ray, so that it eases the insertion in him for the concave arrow and is pushed towards there.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Regarding bloodletting from veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for bloodletting that customarily require bloodletting up to .xxx, which are in the head .xvi., These are the pulsatile veins, which are near the ears and are called auriculars; two plants that are apparent in both temples; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal cavities of each nostril and are called aspicients; and a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two glands near the collarbone; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and - these are the veins called algonic; and they are two veins that drain the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	These are the veins that are bled in the arms, there are .v., These are the veins that are bled in the thighs there are .v., one of those is cephalic, and is on the wild hand; the people call it "the head vein", and soft, it's a mixed vein made up of a branch of basilic, and another branch of cephalic; they call this the "vein of all the body" by the people, and basilic is the vein that is placed in the domestic hand, which is called "shimmering", and the vulgar call it "vein of the belly"; those of the arm are bled upon the elbow, and this is where bloodletting takes place, it appears above the knee for obvious reason; salvation, it's the vein between what was just mentioned, the smallest auricular; they are in its two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the chest and the armpit there are three veins; one of those is that it drains the curvature of the inner elbow on the wild hand. And the second is the subclavian, its place is drained by the armpit of the domestic arm; and sciatic vein, its place is drained from the armpit of the wild hand; and in the armpit there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The youth of the veins that are near the ears is to consider and catarrhal, emigrating, exudative, and ulcerous of the old head ailments.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of causing those is according to what I suggest to you: it should be on the forehead of the sick person, and rub the top of the head in the back (nape) where both veins are in a large fold with good friction; strengthen the sick person's neck with a bend in which two points are visible near the ears at the preauricular places of the head; place that one here on your finger tip, and if you feel the pulse of those on your finger tip, this is a test.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Close you take the cutting lance, and it is that which is incident, close you introduce your finger into the vein within the artery where bloodletting will proceed to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And lift your hand up to the vein and artery towards the parts above, and cut into the vein at an incident point.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the cut be equal to that of two fingers or around this; and drain out the blood as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And strengthen with powders, let that remain until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already mentioned in the beginning of this treatise are the cuts of those and their treatment with cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	These are the two arterial veins that are bled near the temples, and the age of bloodletting is catarrhal oldness and very harmful, recurrent ophthalmia, and general body pain with acute overflow in the nose.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I suggest to you: strengthen the sick person's neck with a bend in which two veins become visible at palpation by manifest appearance, and demonstrate that their pulse is on your finger tip; and then you can test this.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And lift the artery above the vein towards the parts on your finger tip indication, and introduce the bloodletting lancet at an incident point there, and raise the vein up to it; then cut that like you have done with other veins; and let the blood drain according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And loosen the constriction of the neck of the sick person, place your finger on the vein for an hour, and pause at that point with powders, strengthen that above against strong constriction, and let that remain until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already mentioned are their recall, and the cut of those, and the extraction in the beginning of this treatise.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the age of bloodletting for the vein of the forehead is close to that of bloodletting in cephalic veins, for old ailments on the face and catarrh, purging, and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of the bloodletting of the patient is according to what I recommend to you; so when his body strengthens with a lump inside where a vein appears, then take the instrument which is called a hemorrhage tool, having this form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the needle at the protruding point which is at the tip of the hemorrhage tool above that vein, and strike it on the patient either straight up or tilted in your manner, letting the blood flow according to the amount you desire; and then release the incision of the patient's body and strengthen it within so that it may heal.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes the opening for bloodletting is made like that in bloodletting with a needle, but it's important not to have this bloodletting tool be of acute tip as with other bloodletting tools, before having its lateral tip, and that bloodletting (needle) goes across according to the cross-section, where the bone is close and hard it would break through in the patient when it was subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	Let the youth of the two veins that are at the tear ducts of both eyes through saliva from the eyes through sweat and pus in the eyes, and for the face's illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of bloodletting is when the patient's body strengthens with a lump, and then you perform bloodletting on those areas, standing above the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And when bloodletting is performed according to the transversal and longitudinal for a short time with a few bloodletting tools, where in the area there's no flesh; and if the bloodletting tool is subtle, its end gets broken due to being hard.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as necessary for you, place your hand over those points, strengthen them for a night, and then release those areas.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Let the bloodletting from the vein of the nose be applicable to acute fever and strong heat, as well as facial illnesses and migraines that occur in the face, especially when they are old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the bloodletting for this patient is that their body strengthens and you place your right hand on their nose with your own left hand, take the subtle long tool and position it in the middle location at the tip of the nose according to straightness. So that no vein appears here through sensation, and so that when the blood begins to flow shortly.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Understand that you should finish your hand with the bloodletting tool little by little and let the blood flow as needed; then keep that place for a night, for it is quickly restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Let the youth of bloodletting for the two glands lead to constriction, and to the beginning of leprosy, as well as bad facial diseases, itching, and corrosive ulcers such as erysipelas.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of bloodletting for those is that the tool strengthens each one within its body with incision; and place the operator on the head of the patient, and have the patient lying on a couch.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then perform bloodletting along the vein length with ample small tools gradually; and then extract blood according to the season's quantity or according to what you need for necessity here; and then pretend it is another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then release the incision and strengthen both veins with a midline stricture so that the patient's body is not weakened, leave it in the morning when the illness has been healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	Let the youth of bloodletting for veins in the alar region correspond to small abscesses and pustules on the mouth, decay of gums, bad ulcers, and cracks; as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and in the circulation area.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of bloodletting for those is to have your hand ready before you, strengthen the body's curve with a lump, and then move the patient's lips to identify two veins: one from the right side of the lip and the other from the left; each demonstration shows that one side has a darker color than the other, and this is more noticeable when there are small black veins in their circulation area; then you make an incision for each according to a diagonal cut.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you have doubt and don't know which one of them is, then you understand to make an incision on the largest of those, and also on the pus that is evident in those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And pretend it's like the two veins that are found above the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	The custom is to perform incisions on the two veins that are found in your lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The two veins that are near the tongue youth are similar to bloodletting of the cephalic type in front of preheats within the pharynx, for throat illnesses, and oral diseases.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of bloodletting for those is to follow the tongue with your hand in front of the sun's position, elevate their tongue, observe your own tongue, from one side of their vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each declines into darkness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform bloodletting on any of them; and be careful that you do not end your hand with bloodletting there, because those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Your veins that are bloodletted in the armpit are in those where it is common for everyone, and their bloodletting is performed according to two ways, or place them on the bloodletting tool as if it were a myrtle or an olive with gradually decreasing thickness; or sharpen them with a knife-like tool, and call this one "awl", which is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	This rest should be applied to the section and among those are long and subtle ones according to the width of the veins and according to the tightness of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of venipuncture on the arm:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let there be cuts as before with many times, and you should open the concave full veins that seem grossly apparent, and those that contain large stones.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is how it's done for venipuncture on an olive:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This type of venipuncture is for lesser width and more subtle extremity, it's suited for the venipuncture of subtle veins that contain fine stones.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Let the youth of the venipuncture for the basilic vein which is one of three veins: extract the stone from the internal organs that give rise to pain and swelling in the limbs and the body, from this it releases the abdomen and chest.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And the venipuncture should be done by the one performing it, who must take care not to damage that area and keep his hand on it, noting if there is an artery nearby. If he misses or adjusts during the puncture of the venipuncture, he will injure that artery and cause flow of stones, so remember to do this venipuncture with a sharp tool before opening with cutting as you did previously.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein doesn't appear clearly, then make sure you leave that area and try another, or look for any nearby veins; or do a venipuncture at the end of the arm where that is visible; and proceed with the venipuncture as we have described using cutting beforehand.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	And if you want the venipuncture of a metatarsal, then look ahead of the wrist bend where you can feel the area containing the tendons, and position your hand firmly on it; and adjust the arm so that your hand is underneath it; proceed with the venipuncture at a concave section as we have described using cutting beforehand; remember to check for any space between this and the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you prick with strength into the area you've felt under your hand, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery, thus avoid that area.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the stone flows during venipuncture like urine of a child, then know that it's from the stone in the artery; and then you withdraw your hand for a long distance from that area; proceed with your hand as described, and when the stone is removed, where the veins are also removed, then strengthen your arm and leave that area.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the patient's wound, as well as his over-sensitivity and do not let it get infected for a few days until he heals.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the stone is not removed, and when you should not administer medicine to that area, then you will cut into the artery, if it appears before your eyes; where its extremity is contracted, and the stone is removed; or you take a long time and apply pressure there on the spot of the vein with tightness descending at the muscle and among the dust by the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the stone is removed, it's good; otherwise, then care for that with this from which we previously referred to in recalling the location of the dust where there was flow of stones.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And removing the stone from him is difficult in certain positions due to the small size of the wound and the capability of the arm muscle.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	The venipuncture for the dark vein is done with youthfulness by extracting the stone from the upper part of the head and below the chest; so as it's composed of branches of the basilic and of cephalic veins, as we have described.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And the one doing the venipuncture should be careful where they are during the venipuncture of that area, noting if there is a nerve in it; and so if they adjust during the puncture of the venipuncture and find the nerve, it will cause them to go numb, making their recovery difficult, and being strong not all heals. And this nerve appears at certain feelings; and if it's hidden from some people and is subtle and isn't shown, then make sure you pause the venipuncture in the area where you are performing the venipuncture, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The youthfulness of venipuncture for the cephalic vein is that you extract the stone from the head and brings relief to the limb pains.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it's done precisely like this, if you want that the needle pierces into an olive venipuncture or a walnut venipuncture; which is the safest for all veins, so that there are no injuries to your artery or nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, when you perform the venipuncture, remember that with the needle you must only prick up to the edge of the wound, and search for the least obvious area, and don't go too far into it, unless it's revealed in the first palpation where some veins are palpable during venipuncture.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it's difficult to locate in some people when they're not pricked during the first palpation, but you should feel for that abscess in its reappearance.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of this venipuncture and the accidents that might happen during it is such that you must consider their correction when they occur.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first one is about knowing that bloodletting should only be administered under the preservation of health and for the hope and caution of the patient, and to prevent maladies. It involves doing bloodletting at one of the veins located in the arm: cephalic, dark, and basilic; and conducting bloodletting at the beginning of spring, after breakfast during springtime and autumn, and close to winter when signs of overeating appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And bloodletting should be performed and after three hours of the day, or even at the beginning of the first hours that have passed during the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Bloodletting may be administered when it is convenient and necessary for that purpose, either at night or during the day, in any hour and under all circumstances.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is known that an infant should not be bled before they are fourteen years old, a pregnant woman should not be bled until the fourth month of pregnancy, and elderly people should not be bled if they have already surpassed sixty years of age.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wishes to be bled by any means, it is known that they should alter their intestines before bloodletting with a snuffing of lion's dung, if there is an impregnated wound in those areas. This prevents the veins from carrying excess fluid during bloodletting on the intestines, which are cleansed and do not affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not bleed patients who are severely debilitated or drunk, nor before or after illness or intoxication, nor those suffering from dropsy disease, and more that bloodletting should be feared during colic pain and nausea, as well as vomiting, and abdominal pain, and multiple sexual activities or work, and all causes that dissolve their virtue, whether it's physical or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And in the delicate elimination of humors before that, if the complaint is heavy, with food and drinks, and with medicines if it's possible for the patient.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And between baths or any cause that doesn't prohibit it, or through some exercise for the sake that the complaint is refined.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And place the bloodletting on their chest at day time, which would be around the third hour of the day, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And remember that the chest of such should be watched on every day of all animal accidents, such as distress, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as work, excess sorrow, sexual activity, and things similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And according to their wish, make sure to bring the causes in using that which is common among men for scent and fragrance, and for balms and things similar to them, as per their capability.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And the bloodletting practitioner should use a cushion that is more than the size of the patient's pillow to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extend their arm, rubbing it with the bloodletting tool two or three times; and then tighten the bandage around it, covering it with two rounds.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the constriction is rapid, or if the constriction does not equalize, or if there's an excess causing constriction, then prohibit any discharge of the complaint; or if it's due to softening, then prohibit the body from generating more.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And during the constriction, it is known that the person to be bled should rub their hands among themselves before the veins swell and become evident.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And near the bloodletting practitioner uses a little of an anti-itching oil properly; and then pauses his left hand's index finger on that vein, indicating where bleeding is desired, so that the vein begins to protrude slightly, and pressing stops when you find which vein it is as if the heart is forced by the bloodletting, from those are full of air. When the practitioner presses over there, he withdraws the tool; and the bloodletting tool does not pierce the vein, and if it does, that one is tightened.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And thus, it is known that the bloodletting practitioner should be firm and attentive to all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then pause the bloodletting tool, but if the vein is punctured in one round, then it's fine; and otherwise, continue this way, putting a little more on that spot, or pressing on them with force, if the spot isn't hardened.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the spot hardens, or the illness subsides, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, which might draw pus with force, nor take a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And if the patient is in need, then continue the bloodletting process.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the pulse is small and the flow of the complaint is subtle, and you fear that it won't remove enough of the complaint, then increase the bloodletting tool in that area according to rightness and adjust the pulse slightly. Do this with force before the spot hardens; for men who are slightly ill, you should only a few pulses.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	And if you have noticed that it has hardened already, then don't continue over them, for there is no excuse for any cause; pause on those some portion of oil's crack, which alleviates the body from the complaint.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place than oil and that other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly administer a crack of oil in every bloodletting when one bleeds the veins, and they do this as a tumeric ointment and fragrance when it's paused from one of those over that spot, for the complaint is refined and mixed when it becomes heavy.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of bloodletting a large abscess is formed, with many punctures occurring, and especially for those who have not been bled but only this puncturing, or at the site of the small vein opening, then you drain it, place your hand over that area with an infused sponge in water and salt, one cut into pieces, and strengthen it for an hour, until it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And know that this should be done close to the insertion of that vein either on itself or on another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is any darkness or greenness in that place for a few days, do not notice this; and if you wish, place something on that from aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some substance from the juice of mugwort or camomile or similar things.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And if there are many punctures occurring in abscesses and swellings, you should perform bloodletting from the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand on that one, and if later you find softness, keep applying pressure on that part. If the swelling is bad and harmful; then remember to apply some substance as we have mentioned before, for it will flow from the sanatory artery when it's removed.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply plaster to that in water where it is fixed, so the place endures, and then attend to that with other treatments until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And know that you should extract from the blood according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then you let it bleed until it becomes thin; and similarly if you find it thick, then you let it bleed until it becomes subtle; and similarly if it's sharp, then let its sharpness be contained within.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And know that for the one who is full and strong and needs blood extraction in a puncture, you should expand the bloodletting from the vein and make it long.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for those who are weak, do the opposite of that. Know that extract it in many punctures, and let the wound be tight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in bloodletting from a vein is that it's a transverse section, not piercing.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of bloodletting saves from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is commendable and more safe than bloodletting according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And at which it is customary for fainting, you should perform bloodletting, and know that you cure that before the bloodletting with a little piece of cloth infused in wine from borage or simple camomile tea; and extract blood from the wound in three or four punctures.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it's made of complex ingredients, then take before bloodletting an infusion in a mixture of myrrh or flavored honey in spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar things, or in a flavored and fragrant mixture.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs, you should perform bloodletting, and if the cause of his/her bleeding is due to a hot blood state, then know that he/she should drink water from meat and flavored tea with subtle odor; and use aromatics for its chest until it is relieved.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we mentioned in the division under the chapter of fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to empty his/her arms and dissolve his/her blood again after the first puncture, know that for those with blood evacuation, the virtue of which is cold, it empties the blood gradually little by little, so it depends on the quantity of its virtue in consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Those who want to empty their arms and get rid of their blood again after the second puncture, and their body is strong, then do this approximately seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Those who want to draw blood from their body against the direction in which it normally flows, know that it should be emptied on the second day or the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Those for whom there is already blood that has been removed and it is sharp, causing fever, know that you should empty this with one puncture and a large quantity of your blood, expanding the opening so as not to occur fainting. And when you are aware of all the conditions of bloodletting; and place your hand on their pulse for your blood's sake, in order not to die at the point of fainting, because many punctures should do this when the bloodletter is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not know when you want to free the arm and empty the blood again, just as soon as close off the opening of the vein and makes bleeding from the blood difficult, then press under that with forcefulness and slightly bend it outwards, which is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Let it be that you leave it after a second bloodletting; or continue with the sharpness of the bloodletting that is coagulated by the blood in the opening of the vein; or place your hand on that with thorn apple ash, or sage, and press it lightly under which the blood should come out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that and do not touch it until the abscess subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to empty the blood again, and it is not an excuse, then you prick him/her in that spot or on the other arm through another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "the blood cord of the arm" is ligated in place of the spleen or the basilica, when they are not present or hidden, which is made up of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the ligation for them is that the patient dips their hand in hot water into the fire, so that the skin turns red and the vein becomes明显manifestly visible.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And firmly apply there in the middle of that knot with a narrow constriction; and then ligate it according to the transverse direction, not laterally or according to length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make your incision wide and for your ligation, do it in the one where you ligate that above the joint of the hand, a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of bile is prohibited, then you immerse your hand in hot water and lets the bile run in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	May it be that you were in the days of summer, then you excuse the repetition of your hand in hot water, and in winter keep the body of bile in hot water.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The ligation for this vein is especially safe compared to all other veins, which do not have pulsating blood or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The ligation of the artery in the right palm is associated with diseases of pregnancy.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the ligation for them is that you strengthen your hand at the elbow or with your own hand, as you have it in hot water, so that the vein swells and is clearly shown; then ligate that transversely; and if you cut all those, don't let it bleed.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And remember not to end your hand in the ligation of blood vessels, for them you have the nerves of the fingers exposed.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse your hand in hot water and let the bile flow through it. If you don't immerse that in hot water, the bile will clot in the opening of the vein, and this is forbidden for circulation.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the bile is extracted according to the amount needed, then you place salt on the vein so that it doesn't clot immediately; similarly do this in all branched veins.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	May it be that the youth of the ligation for this one in the left hand is associated with diseases of pregnancy.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do something similar for the ligation of this as you did for the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the youth of the hepatic vein in ligation is associated with diseases that occur in the body's left parts, just like pregnancy diseases and retention of menses, as well as redness and ulcers on thighs and old sores, and it resembles other diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the ligation for this is that the patient dips their hand into hot water and makes friction where veins appear; they place their hand on the chest joint with a strip; and in the area of the apparent vein you should apply your fingers, and from there its branches extend to the flesh of the arm.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore ligate the widest branch or place the cushion under the increase of it, which is better and more salt.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you ligate that in the flesh of the arm, then you avoid the nerves that are on that side of the flesh, and stop your ligation at the place where you ligate across, as though you wanted to cut it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And may the ligation serve you well.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	May it be that the flow of bile is prohibited; then you immerse your hand in hot water and let the bile run through there until it is drained.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the ligature misses in the first attempt, then retry at the ligation point a little further down, which is safe; and do not fear its danger, but watch out for the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly perform on the other arm in equal manner.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, as we said before, place your fingers under the notch of the wild part's groove.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The purpose of the ligation for this is to relieve hip pain when it's due to bile blockage.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the ligation for this is that the patient dips in hot water and quickly tightens the leg at their ankle above the fourth finger on a long narrow bend, which only appears like this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you ligate that according to each organ as is possible and according to the transverse direction, which is better. Or cut there through incision or seal that with coagulation, where its location is safe.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in the flesh of old men who are weakened; and if you find that one, but it doesn't show on touch, then ligate a branch from there, and that is the one that appears behind the said angular bone and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And watch out for the nerves, let the amount of bile you want flow.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then relieve the constriction and place your hand on the ligation site firmly, which somewhat heals immediately.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding suction and the qualities of using those [tools or techniques].
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Suction devices are made from horns, reeds, or bones.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is done in two ways: one of them is a cut and removal of pus, and the other is ventilation with a cut.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this kind of ventilation which is through cutting has two ways, either by fire or with the aid of fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the ventilation administered through cutting and pus removal is performed at fourteen body locations, of which one where the vents are placed is the navel, it being the last part of the head; and the middle location in the midst of the two parts of the belly; and mouth vent leaves the jaw, allowing pus to be expelled from the mouth; and vent on both spatulas; and vent at alohoster, it is at the end of the penis; and vent at both fire tools, they are one handbreadth apart; and vent at both armpits; and vent at both thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And ventilation does not remove the pus but from thin, scattered veins in the flesh, thus it does not lose its virtue by that means, just as bloodletting is done; nor should ventilation be performed with fire or with the aid of fire in any illness caused by fullness inside where the body has not been fully evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	May it be that when necessity prompts for ventilation due to illness or continuous condition, administer that at the beginning of the month and at its end, in the middle part of the treatment and at any other time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	This is the cause for which men suffer when pus multiplies within them during extraction by ventilation, and they find its severity in their head and sweat; from those who find themselves full and distress in their face and head, and in their chest; from those who find pain on their face and forehead, darkness and confusion in their breaths; from those whose location of their ventilation is disturbed; from those whose laughter increases; from those who find taste for pus in their mouth, or whose tongue is swollen and discharges pus; from those whose sleep increases; and from those who vomit pus during sleep, restlessness, pains and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when in any cause of those, and especially if it is towards the third or middle part of the month, then commands for ventilation to be performed before passing the day or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the youth of neck ventilation is that when it progresses in severity in the head and to what settles in the breaths; may it be that this corresponds to an evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this type of bleeding is at the site of bloodletting on the cephalic region.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not written that one should use that which inflames or causes catarrh in him, as this can cause great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And thus it is not appropriate to use that for the old people, and on their heads where illnesses occur.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May it be that for the one who is continuously over him, he experiences forgetfulness; thus it is wise to command the person doing ventilation to place his hand slightly under the suction cup at the points used, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Ventilation with alcohol is at the site of bloodletting on the dark vein and the basilica: thus it causes asthma, constriction of airways, splitting of bile ducts, coughing, and fullness.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is wise to apply alcohol ventilation for a short time; if it is left on longer, it causes weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the ventilation with almond oil causes headaches in the head and eye diseases, migraines, pre-fertility, and dental pain; this is done at the site of bloodletting on the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it is wise to command the person doing ventilation not to press their hand on a cut so as not to puncture an artery and allow pus to flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And leaving ventilation on the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, and decay of gum tissue, and symptoms similar to those diseases present in the mouth, and is done at the site of bloodletting on almond oil which is found on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the ventilation that is performed over both spatulas causes cataracts, which is done due to fullness of quality.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation over both parts inside the fire tools causes youth of bloodletting from three veins, which are the basilic vein, dark vein and cephalic vein. This one draws out pus from all those scattered veins present in the flesh, as well as those small veins within the larger veins where passage reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the person doing ventilation not to proceed in cutting, where the place is stripped of flesh, and leave his nerves and arteries untouched.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And this is an extraction on which it is extracted from anus, causing hemorrhoids of the anus and leaving ulcers with pus.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it is wise to command the person doing ventilation that it be strong and made of iron, where the place requires intense drying; and for him to use subtle suction cups that are cut with cutting.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	May it be that the ventilation of the glands reduces them visibly, which draw out pus from the entire body and cause old chest pains, the womb, and bladder; they also induce menstruation, causing pain in the abdomen; this is done at the site of bloodletting on two sinuses, and aorta, and both armpits.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, it weakens the entire body and causes fainting in adult males.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	From the suction cups, the doctors direct towards the young to the young at the suction areas of both sides.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the suction cups is to place the cup at the beginning and let it work for a short time with early breathing, do not prolong the position of the suction cups, rather pause them lightly, remove them gradually, and have the fluids arrive at the spot in equal fashion.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And don't stop repeating this until you see the area already turn red and swell, and that the sign of the illness appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scrape and gradually increase the breathing, and more importantly consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that person who has tender flesh, it is wise to scrape only once and not repeatedly, so the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the suction cup operator to expand the scraping a bit and do it gently, always ensuring easy breathing.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is thickening in the illness, then know that you should scrape twice, where in the first scraping, you open the pathway of respiration to the illness and to his moisture.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second, look into the acquired moisture from the extraction of thickened illness.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the illness is very viscous, then it must be done by scraping for the third time so that it gets to the end.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And gradually at the end, when we want to extract a little of the illness bit by bit or a small amount, up until now with one scraping.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want extraction of a large amount of illness, we scrape with larger scraping; and if we know that the illness is thick, then know that you should scrape through wave-like scraping.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scraping ends at the depth of the chain just as much.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the chain of that person is thick, hard, dark, and his pores are stretched out, know that the suction cup areas should be moistened more gently, with wider, easier resolution; during summer time, for instance, use almond oil or lavender oil or oil from lemon leaves, or from coriander seeds; and if it's winter time, then use camphor oil, or oil of mint, or chamomile oil, or from illness, and similar things.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick, rough, then know that use bitter oil, or oil of frankincense, or oil of almond, or thyme oil, and similar things.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the suction cup operator has large pores with tender flesh, then know that oil should be prohibited, and consider these for the areas under the suction cups near the suction process, they should be washed with warm water or hot water from solatrum, or with water from coriander, or water from basil, and similar things applied to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for that person whose illness has a moist nature, wash his suction cups with vinegar, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar things applied to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for that person whose excesses are thick, wash his suction cups with vinegar old, or water of senna, which is marjoram, or from the decoction of thyme, or chamomile water, and similar things applied to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And know that the suction should be kept in front of bathing; also know that it should be administered close to the heat of the bath for one or two hours, and know that he should sleep near the suction.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that needs to be done when regulating a bloodletting tool before using it for suction therapy?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Know that at the beginning: if the person who is to bleed or who needs bloodletting has anger and heat above his illness and inflammation, know that he should take cooling remedies, such as sorrel salads with vinegar and milk, seaknife, julep, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And let his foods be such as poultry, game meats, and seasoned dishes with herbs, and similar things for him.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for that person whose complexion is rough, know that he should drink essences of wormwood or essence of saffron from seeds, and sumac, and wine slightly fragrant between old and young; and it must be advised to him that he should use moderation in drinking and eating, and let his poultry foods, combers, rabbits, small game birds and doves pause.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And know that on the day of suction therapy and bloodletting, his drink should be more than his food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And know that in some hours before some men take tincture of tyrian alfarac, or medicines with musk, such as cardamom, or nutmeg before suction therapy or bloodletting, or nearby, so that their main limbs are comforted and the illness is made subtle; do not let them take those scalding things.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	And the suction cups that are for scraping should be suction cups that rest on the flesh, and over gout, and on the belly button, in the areas of joints, and the armpit, which these limbs do not suffer from scraping upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not due to those suction cups but the illness of limbs, such as resting a vacuum cup on the breast in illness of flow of body's illness from nostril; and we use that to dissolve the thick, viscous breathing, such as rest on the belly and umbilicus; for which that invigorates the limb, chills him and removes the pain that resolves the breath.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And when it is paused on the lungs whenever they occur or fall, which by virtue of suction force make a person vomit and remove the pain from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	Similarly when it is paused on the stomach and intestines, causing wind release in those confined within.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These suction operations are performed with water alone sometimes; some are done with fire as well.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Some are performed fully with hot water in the diseases of the intestines.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is why the suction should be full and produce much pus, so it's just hot water or water in which herbs suitable for the water are boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of suction administered with fire: let the size of the opening be that of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the amount of charcoal is as much as a palm's length; and place it at the back of him, in the area where it is on the circulation route, the same length as him, take the forceps small according to the quantity that enters him with one needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is made using garlic or citrus, large pieces, lion's heart, and tender parts in such a way that doesn't lead the member to its position above him.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it should be at the top of his back in the cross-shaped area of garlic or iron, where the candle is placed on the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this is how the large suction is greater than the one we have prescribed; and use less oil according to the diseases and the condition of that which uses that.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And child suction cups and exhausted ones are different from teenage and large cross ones.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of stopping this suction on the member is to extend the material on fire of wood decently in front of a small candle of wax, and place that over the middle of the back across at the middle spot of the suction, so that the fire be lit around your position so that it doesn't burn the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And return it to be placed on the patient's member, and let it be over the forceps that we have said, within which when we have the suction cups and they no longer need the forceps and vaporize above that forceps, then the suction should soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And heat the material according to its manner, and repeat that if you need more of it.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In suction used in the disease of pleurisy, with water, without any back or forceps, and is only administered when filled with water, and placed on the member alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is how it is: And this suction cup, the larger it is, the better it is, so that it can receive large quantities of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Suction cups are not administered in the mouth of members, but in the limbs where it's impossible to place suction cups due to their smallness, like the throat and gums, similar to them; or on a bare member of flesh, similarly as said, and those that resemble it.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found to be blood cups that are in the waters of cooked red water.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And let them rest for the day and night in hot water until they cool down, and do not cause any harm inside their stomachs; then evacuate his body at the beginning with phlebotomy and suction treatments; and wash your patient's limbs so that they turn red; and return them to be placed on him.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled, and in case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it's possible to use water from the area with suction, it's better for teenagers.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And otherwise, then wash the area with hot water and later with cold water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the patient's body is prolonged under the place of the blood suction cups, and this water comes out, then you put a linen cloth in hot water, and place that over it so that the discharge is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the sweat is multiplied, then sprinkle it over him with vitriol that has been ground finely, or gallstones and similar substances from the causes of stasis, so that the sweat is stopped; or place the ashes of cooked beans on the affected area, and let them be left until the beans adhere to the area, so that the sweat stops.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if needed, repeat the use of blood suction cups, whenever it's possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if blood suction cups are not allowed to be suspended, then wash the area with recent sweat or leave an awl in the affected areas so that sweat arises; and let them return, for those when feeling any sweat should soon arise.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to come down, grind a little of ground aloes or salt or ashes over those, and let it happen immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	So begins the treatment for the recovery part: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is about necessary points in the art of medicine; it is about restoring fractures and accidental dislocations in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that doctors and the vulgar, and those who neglect the writings of the Ancients or do not even read a single letter from them, speak of this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the learned in our land is made private; and I have not forgotten anything during these times that should be done; and I did not refer to anything that was mentioned, but through the long reading of the works of the Ancients and studying their understanding, so that I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And indeed, direct experience and study throughout one's life length is necessary.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my experiments have been made; since abbreviating it for you others and freeing it from the occupation of elongation; and abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and show it at the end of declaration; and form it into spots, patterns of the storms that are administered there, as done by declaration, thus I did in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from the fracture of bones, from those being necessary for mention before we start recalling limbs and various parts of each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Let us therefore mention the summaries of the speech in the preface of this chapter; and the chapters which when presented at the beginning challenge the craftsmen's understanding on the truth of those; are you and those who prompt to know or learn this noble art, others from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And thus say that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or compression, then consider starting with bloodletting or treating that area, or at any time, if no cause is forbidden, such as vertigo or which affects that region, or rather in decrepitude, or it's the time of violent heat, or of violent sweating.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And indeed be content with food consisting of herbs, fawns' meat and crabs; and forbid large meats and fill in with all foods that fill the veins of sanx, within which you can be sure of an abscess cauterization, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their original position where they usually are.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the broken bone begins to be restored, let the patient be fed with nutritious foods that are thick and heavy, such as bread made from flour cooked in water, rice, carrots, meat, stomachs of cows, hams, fresh pork, and very thick and similar things to those, and under this regimen, clotting of the pus is done lightly and well.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones heal when they are in those who are in the first vigor and in the old age, it is not possible for them to continue healing and be consolidated according to their nature through the drying of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continue according to their nature for the drying of those limbs, and they are continued and consolidated those that are from them at the end of youthfulness, such as the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But indeed nature adjusts and renews about the broken bone of every part any cause similar to glue in which thickening adheres and strengthens it within which there are times of coagulation and are times when the end of strength and firmness come, such as fire at the beginning, within which for no cause do you prevent him from doing his work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to restrict the foods of the patient, foods in which there is heaviness, viscosity and thickness as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Variety of fractures according to variety of member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the variety of members, a fracture of the bone of the shoulder is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and the fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the leg bone; similarly all other members differ among each other.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have completed the recall of every type of fracture, detailed in its chapter separate from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Variety of self-intersecting fracture.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And there are diversified types of fractures in the bones of their intersections; which is made an arched fracture or another that may occur in its star shapes. And sometimes the fractures are made according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the satellite, stars and additions originating and not originating, such as when it is prepared to write, and there is a fracture with bleeding and disruption in the head, and this is the small crack fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for every type, there is an own storm in restoration according to it that will come with the detailed recall of it in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Variety of signs of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And thus the bone fracture is known: it's the bending of the thing, and its prominence and location relative to the feeling, and in that when you press that against your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And indeed when there is no visible bending and it's not felt when you apply pressure on the bone with your touch, when touching the bone under tension and the patient doesn't feel much pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there may be bending or small cracks, let it be known that you should hold this in your hand and under compression of the whole; pause on these with respect to medicines which we will recall shortly at this moment as they fit for its place; and straighten it through subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when it is arched and not split into two or another that does not occur in its satellite, which is enlarged throughout its circumference, then let it be known that you should start with your time to correct this arc until it has an abscess cauterization.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it has an abscess cauterization, then smooth that for several days until the abscess disappears; and then adjust that according to any method of lightness and ingenuity that you can.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration of his health and improvement of his condition is much less than in bone where it occurs suddenly.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And strengthen the second one as soon as the patient's memory returns.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If it's in the bone where it's broken, then an extension of this broken member from two parts is necessary, whether it's a hand or a foot; or with your own hand if the member is small; or with two threads or one thread and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And make your position such that you place the member in its natural location equal to its figure, while extending the divided parts of the broken member, then do as much as possible to make those additions return and according to any method you can apply in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard yourself so that it doesn't happen to the patient during your operation or injury, and apply as much as possible with one bone to another their counterpart according to the best ways.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And when in that moment profitably touch your hand there, and if you notice any cause differently here, correct it and adjust it according to the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid strong extension and compression, just as many veteran doctors cause blisters or abscesses to occur due to their operations, or cause contraction in the limbs, which we have seen happen through their actions.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And connect, establish equilibrium and proper operation and restriction of that member, providing rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and encourage them to avoid hurting themselves during their sleep and night-time activities. Observe its movement and change, assess their weakness and manage all their movements with your full virtue; wait until the position of the limb is a position where pain is assured, which causes it when felt in the disposition of the member's position or injury; then consider changing this to another position from where they do not feel pain. Ensure that the position of their previous position is straight and equal so that there is no twisting of the member as it is being restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the restriction of the broken limb is what you should know; that each broken limb varies in their size and their grandness and in their form.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small like the arm and so on as mentioned earlier, then consider that the wrapping should be of soft fabric.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	For those that are large like the thigh or chest, consider that for these there should be a firm wrapping, where you tie the rough fabric tightly around the large and strong member from all sides with equal restriction, so that it does not cause any marks.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And when you start, proceed with your adjustment and placement, properly on what suits, over the site of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to the member's need; and strengthen your hand a bit at the seam.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And when you move to that higher part of the site of the fracture, make sure not to allow your restriction (of the bandage) to affect the area where you have tightened the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And when you lengthen the wrapping on the site of the fracture slightly, gradually soften the restriction little by little until you have freed up a large portion of the area.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And take another bandage, wrap it around the broken area in addition to the wrapping, and when you move towards those wrappings near the more distant part of the fracture; and your operation is about softening and adjusting this wrappings following what we mentioned in the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And when you are between the wrappings of cloth or bandage, make sure it matches the curvature of the fracture if there is any curvature in it; otherwise, don't pause on it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And when you rest on the other bandage, then gradually make adjustments over these somewhat well-formed bandages. If there is no swelling or abscess in that area, then rest where there is that abscess or swelling; and let it be for a few days; then strengthen over this.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And may the stars of the length of cane be rough and well-formed; or they may be made from wood; or from palm leaves; and let each star have this size and this shape:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, consider that the star placed over that fracture should be slightly larger and more accurate than the other stars. The length of the star according to its reading in size and smallness relative to the member; then strengthen on these stars with another bandage as per your initial restriction; then lie properly for adjustment as we have said about restriction, so that your restriction is most over the site of the fracture, and the more extended you make it from the fracture, the better healing will be.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And consider that the threads should be medium in size and thickness, and they should be many. If the threads are large, as I have seen from the operation of some times placing those large string cords for curvature correction, this is a great mistake when making the restriction equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And straight threads are not convenient because you won't be able to achieve the restriction that you want with them on these. And consider that there should be no more than one finger's width between each thread.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is made to lie at the ends of the stars near the restriction in those areas, then pause with these as a layer of lion's wool or treated linen so that it doesn't cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are caused by injury, leading to disruption in the chain of events, and I will recall that memory in that place at the capitol according to singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	Know that all broken members do not harden to stars on the first day; this cause is that when the member is large, it doesn't allow you to rest on your stars instead, approximately two days or three or more, according to your confidence in the occurrence of an abscess during cautery.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the method of plasters on which the Ancients worked, who were placed upon fractures, dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The method of plastering like it is done in restoration of a fracture, suitable for complex injuries and mostly for women and children, which works without causing heat or friction: you take powdered flour, and this is the corn starch that comes out when the movement of the mill happens in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And do it this way as described, or else sieve that with egg white, and pause the thickening of your not-thin nor subtle mixture; then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of treating fractures and dislocations and twists: follow this recipe with asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, rue, and myrrh, all finely ground into a thousand grains each; for the total weight is one dragon. For myrrh and aloes it's five dragons' weights each; for alcohol or egg white if the patient's condition allows; and then use this plaster, which has good composition and restores broken bones gently, giving strength to muscles.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of plastering which helps with fractures and twists: use this recipe - myrrh and white alum for one dragon, myrrh and aloes for five dragons, acacia for six dragons, and Armenian balsam for twenty dragons.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Of all parts they are ground in a mortar with the mixture for friction, then sieved, and made into a paste with water or almond milk, to be administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	The method of plastering for joints and bones separated from their places, where there is friction in those areas and stress fractures or cracks occur: take wool thread and immerse it in vinegar and oil of turpentine, then place it on the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This plaster does not have healing power for restoration, for abscess cautery and expulsion of pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plastering that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of saved opium poppy; mix both to make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	The abbreviated method of applying plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of the remnant of an abscess: prepare a mixture from chamomile, violet flowers, flour of poppy seeds, in all parts one. Let everything be ground and made into a paste with vinegar if the member is not sensitive.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it's sensitive, then use that in water of fresh lemon or in water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plastering for pus that promotes faster resolution than this first one, when an abscess occurs and requires the restoration of the member: prepare a mixture from chamomile, seeds of basil, and lavender, honey, thyme, violet flowers, chamomile, all in equal parts; everything is ground and made into a paste with water of sauzes or two waters or lemon water, according to the quality of the member and the color of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Mays Ypocras does not say in his free writings that it should be placed on the broken member for restoration, rather wax is used for the paste made of beeswax and oil instead of anything else; and it's recommended to have a medium consistency between coarseness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Gualia sees that it should be placed on the broken member for its restoration and the causes where dryness comes from good quality such as myrrh, ashes, and things similar to those causes which we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	The method of plastering that helps with injury and pain: mix finely ground ashes, human hair cut off or animal bones, chamomile, and salt, all in equal parts; grind and sieve them, make them into a paste.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount depends on whether it causes inflammation and if it is not causing pain or pressure, nor has the bone been broken from its place, then you don't disturb the patient for days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if it causes pain, pressure or swelling in that area, then you should either soothe it immediately or remove the plaster from it, and keep your plaster ready.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and a wet lemon sponge from him, immerse that in hot water, then using it wash the area until the pain ceases and the discomfort is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour; also place on him wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rubbed oil, and cover him with this overnight to ensure there's no pus formation, ensuring the swelling of the limb subsides, and alleviate his pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And carefully iterate this compression, apply a bandage, and don't tighten it for your initial discomfort, also gently place this within so that it heals.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you notice that the pus and the heat and the pain and the swelling and all other incidents have already subsided completely, and you need neither bandaging nor compression anymore, then proceed with this method as you did at the beginning with equal measures.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause occurs to that limb from those we've mentioned, then don't disturb it but rather wait approximately three days or four or five or seven; And certain lacerations of this whole thing is left for twenty days according to how it appears through the loosening of the limb, as we have said, during which time the fracture adheres, and it settles into the coagulation of the flesh upon that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the compression more than in your initial compression altogether, and adjust to the swelling of the food of the patient, according to when memory returns for him.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	Maybe if you notice that the place of the fracture has already dried and thinned more than it is covered, then you know that nutrition can no longer reach there; thus, coat that with hot water for each occasion; and do this for all three days; then slightly ease the compression, and through this operation bring nourishment to the member, and it heals somewhat.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	Perhaps for those who restore fractures of the limb, another occasion when it is not restored at the beginning, according to whether it is covered or not and is restored according to its curvature, this is an error according to their operation, with great fear. And if it were a tailor, such expansion in their free works would be healed by that opened work.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I haven't seen any of them do this, so it's more reasonable that this doesn't happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Consideration for when a fracture occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are impacts and their figures are various, as are the causes. Some fractures occur due to impact by force, causing the body to be completely shattered within it, leaving the bones intact, similar to when a log is shattered, for which this type is named 'shattering'. Or the force impacts a part of the bone, impacting the flesh without passing through its rear; and this kind of fracture is called absolute dislocation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two types of fractures is great or small, and for crushing or pulling fractures. The cause for them is impact against stone or hitting on stone, and they resemble it.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating that it almost reaches the pulp which leaves the bones intact; or in the surface of the bone. The plague of these two types of fractures is either large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And it's the fracture that grows within the bone, with subtle hairs, for which this type of fracture is named 'capillary'.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it's the fracture that is made by hitting or by impact on stone, which resembles them, causing some layer of bone to enter into the parts inside, and happens in the concave area, as happens with the teeth when they are hit and their entryway enters into the parts inside.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And mostly this happens in the bodies of moist bones, such as children's heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these types of fractured parts, they are like separate stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will come back with the healing of this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I know all these types of fractures through detection on them and examination of the putrid flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is known by this that it is discovered above the bone and it is cleaned off, with its limit on it being examined, for where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	And in the treatment of fractures consider the symptoms of the patient at the beginning, and then if you encounter due to these symptoms which signify manifestly on pain, for example vomiting from colic, expansion, loss of understanding, tooth abscess, fainting, acute fever, nostril discharge and heat of those, as well as similar symptoms in major conditions, it is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you notice non-occurrence symptoms you expect recovery, then you begin the treatment for him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	This cause is that if it has come to you the injury at the beginning like it was injured and this happens in the days of winter, then after studying within the bone facing day 14 according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it's in the days of summer, then you can expect to leave the bone facing on the 7th day, having what leaves the bones being corrupted by the pulp, and that occurrences happen which we have recounted.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already penetrated into the pulp covering the brain, and it's in parts that are crushed and pulled, then you can expect to insert the part with mixed and rubbed together, as I will instruct you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And indeed you open the head of the patient's ailment, and expose the bone as customary and according to your skill and manner, secondly on the figure of the ailment, and ensure it is gentle upon the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens that you need to detect the bone, fluid of pus or abscess flow, then you press against them with this tool, and indeed you smell the place with infused cloths in vinegar and rubbed oil, and make the patient rest inside the ailment where the abscess is sedated; and be sure of blood flow; and then start from around the bone and during its excision.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And indeed, one should operate according to one of two surgical methods.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first method is that you incise into the bone with an elongated cutting tool, and this is its form: And then administer another incision here, slightly shorter than the previous one; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more incision tools that are wider than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should use different numbers of incision tools, among which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than the others, with their tips being sharpened or pointed at their extremities.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them for ease in percussion on the incisions, so as not to crush the head and harm that one.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should puncture in front of the area where you will administer the incisions, which are named pre-cut tunnels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called so simply because those do not reach the end of the bone test until it is close to that point; indeed, at the tunnel, the rounded extremity or edge is similar to a sharp cap resembling an edge or small circle, which should not be submerged and should not surpass the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient for you to use a large number of these tunnels, each one suitable for the thickness of every bone, within which there should be an acute extremity at all times when present in all tests of the skull. The quantity in length and breadth should correspond to the amount of thickness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of tunnels: When piercing into the circuit of the broken bone, you press the tunnel onto the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then adjust the tunnel to another location and press this one right in-between all, considering the thickness of the ray or around it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you incise with the tool that is between any part of the bone, making it slightly deeper as you lift towards the end, just like we have said, while drilling the bone or with your hand or by some other means using tools you might have prepared for this, such as a small taphole and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And make sure that when using the tool, it does not touch any part of the patient's body.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have drilled the bone through, and separated it from the body if it continues with this, take out that piece, be careful to compare and equalize its roughness with what is in the bone by another tool similar to a cutting instrument, however, make sure that it is much finer and more delicate than other cutting instruments.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you encounter any fragment of small bones and solid ones, take that with ease using the tools that are suitable for your hands; then apply this treatment to the wound with lint and ointments as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other surgical method is gentler, far removed from pain, which Guillaume and Laузe performed using great skill; this is what they say: it is necessary for you at the beginning to start discovering the part of the bone in the location where the fracture is more intense and more obvious. When you have discovered that part and placed the tip of this incision tool gently and quickly, as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And indeed, the circular part is smooth and does not cut any cause. The sharp part is in two lateral directions before its length, as it is said; that the circular part should be placed close to the body against the face of the sharp incision tool at an angle with the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then you strike upon the incision tool of one part with a small hammer while cutting through all the bone as smoothly as rotated it, and be sure of your nerves that they will not hit any accident which you fear in some manner. If the doctor was the most experienced person among all men and the least knowledgeable about them; certainly, if he was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then if you encounter any adjacent cause to the bone of nerves in some places of the bones, cut with this using the tip of the incision tool that is circular, and pull this off easily, which is pulled out from its injury and pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the nerves, and what is separated or left of the bone is its face, there is roughness and delicate solids in it. So you should take care to smooth that roughness and remove those delicacies with finely sharpened tools which you have prepared in various amounts, so that you may possibly administer some from them in all places according to their most suitable qualities and the straight way of doing things when performing your operation on this broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And indeed, when you administer according to your judgement, clean out the inner parts starting with the opening of the organs, and then use it close to the subtle fluid beneath him, and do not cease performing this until you reach the discharge of both the thick pus and the subtle fluid from all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	May this apply to any of the other small capillary fractures or subtle breaks, and when you administer treatment according to what leads to correction of him.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because they are not healed on all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And stand on what we have written, showing great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the intestine gets stuck when you puncture the organ, then when you have taken the quantity of cloth according to the size of the wound, immerse that in oil rubbed and place it on the wound's opening; then take another folded or triple-layered cloth and immerse it in wine and oiled rubbed, place this one on the first cloth, and gently apply a little pus over it without causing pain. And administer lime over it as well, do not press it until you have covered the size of the wound exactly.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And let this treatment last for one or two days until you are sure of the pus being evacuated; then remove it and administer medicines that prevent excessive dryness, such as flaxseed and bran of oats, powders of ashes and aristolochia, and herbs similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make this from these medicines as a powder to be sprinkled over the wound while it's dry; in general, administer all medicine of its properties that repel and do not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And observe your virtue to ensure that the wound during your treatment becomes clean; and do not let it get into the greasy layer of ointment or any other thing; nor let you introduce toxicity in him; for when placed over the membrane of the brain, it corrupts that and leaves that, and then happens this evil malice on the patient close to this maliciousness.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And when it occurs in the head, as his condition changes with him and much more so when your treatment for him is neglected, and there's a darkness on the surface of him; then consider this time if any accidents that we've mentioned happen to the patient, know that it's all due to badness.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if no darkness occurs but only from the medicine that's placed upon it, and this darkness is due to the virtue of that medicine causing that darkness, then when you take one part of honey and parts of oiled rubbed three times. And weave these lines on a cloth, then place this on the head; and treat him with the spices of healing until he's healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter three.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	About restoring the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken into two parts simultaneously from above, or one of those split several times, because in him there are two bones, and the part you leave is cartilaginous, it's not broken, and doesn't affect him but rather causes irritation and obstruction.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	And if one of the two parts of him is broken, then when you introduce your small finger into his nose, and equalize that break internally by your finger's tip, and place the finger's base outside, so that it returns the nose according to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this in your ease, and observe not to let that your operation fall on the patient's whole body.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose that's above, and your finger doesn't reach that, then when you equalize it to the extremity of the bone where there's a small thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should make this semblance.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And guide yourself in the restoration of him during the first day of the fracture, if it's possible; otherwise, then by the seventh or tenth you should resume the pus evacuation treatment.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And when you're ready, insert a piece of linen cloth into the tip of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or two cloths, if it's in two parts; and place them inside the cloths to fill the nasal passage with as much quantity as fills the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And among the ancient restorers, they said that the cloths should be wrapped in gauze and changed every day, though I haven't seen this; when you do, make sure the cloth is wrapped with egg white paste mixed with powder of myrrh; then leave the cloth until the bone is fixed and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some of them would insert linen cloths in the nose instead of a cloth, to prevent an abundant pus that's wrapped with linen from entering him; and it is that already you have the fracture of his nose very intense and that the patient isn't prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this reason is not necessary to you; if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use cloths.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another pus discharge occurs during the treatment, apply a plaster on the nose with gauze or with a compress soaked in wine and oiled rubbed, or use vinegar.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	And if no pus discharge occurs, then when you apply plaster outside with oat bran and powdered myrrh with egg white; then place on it a linen sheet, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If you have broken the bones of the nose either in a small fracture or if they are comminuted, then make cuts over those, and remove them with instruments that suit those; and then cover the incision, and heal that by what unites and consolidates, and with plasters that suit.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if an injury occurs inside the nose, then make cuts to heal that by cauteries and administer lead cannulas inside until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Head four.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Regarding the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and there's no need for surgery, consider if the fracture is only external, and is not split into two parts but bent towards the inside of the body, in which case its cognition is mild.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And when the fracture is in the right part, you should insert your left index into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert that same index of your right hand. Push the fluidity of the fracture inward with ease to the outside parts, using your other hand on the outside side of the bone; do this properly as you've just done it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jaw fracture has already separated into two parts, then make sure to administer extension of both parts according to rightness while making it possible for their equality.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there's a commotion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those you expect will break with the thread of gold or silver or copper; and place pressure on the broken jaw with a cast, and also place pressure on the patient's double sheet, and place pressure on the large star-shaped sheet that has been made decently, or one piece equal in length to the jaw; and lay that there according to how you've assessed the thickness of the material and that which suits its application, while ensuring it isn't destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be calm, and let him pause from eating the lion's food.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the figure has been altered in any way, then you take and untie that on the third day; and properly correct whatever is already altered in you, plaster it with bone dust, or with the album of oil, or with wheat flour, once you have covered the patient's cast again, and lay this woolen plaster over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when that plaster is properly placed on you, and the position of the bone isn't altered, let that be, don't untie it until it's healed and strengthens the fracture; this broken bone heals in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another occurrence results in pus formation, then administer what we've said about healed situations for your pain while it heals, and ensure that pus is cleared from that location.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if there's surgery needed for the fracture, then consider whether it's a piece of bone that's separated or stuck, in which case you carefully extract those stuck pieces with what suits you for removing them from the fluids.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wounds of the surgery are stretched, then you should expand them with a scalpel according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have removed those stuck pieces and they are no longer present, then you should cover the wound area if it is wide; otherwise, place one of the plasters that suits here to fuse that part, while it heals.
Capitol .v.	Head five.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Regarding the restoration of the furca when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Healed situations involve breaking the furca from in front of the muscle, and this fracture is made in three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Whether it's broken, separated, or separated into two parts without sticking together, this is easier to restore. Or if there are sticking pieces present, it makes restoring it more difficult. Or perhaps the fracture involves surgery.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture involves surgery, is for you to have two ministers present, so one can hold the assistant and follow the broken furca, and the other extends the neck muscles of that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And when you have united the fracture with your fingers until its form is made according to how you see fit, without it being too small nor concave in the prominence.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you require more extension, then make sure to place a strip of cloth or wool on the patient's expectation, and its size according to your need; extend and elevate the furca and bind that area with your hand until you unite the fracture as you see fit.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the furca outward to the outside parts, due to it being pressed against the front, then make sure for the patient to lie back on their neck, and place a hand halfway in size over their muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses against the muscle of the patient outward until the bone of the furca is elevated as it is in front of their chest, then you correct the fracture and unite that with your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	And if you feel sticking pieces of the furca that are stubborn, then make sure to cut over it and remove those sticking pieces with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it's held in the bone, then you devise an incision from that with one of the surgical instruments you have prepared for this purpose, as you previously placed the furca on the tool that serves to cut through muscles; and this is the shape of that tool:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It is like the contents of which this forms the cavity; and its width according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the fragility of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Let the length of it be according to what is feasible in the operation; may there be two ends like sometimes, and one end broad while the other is tight.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the wound disruption that you have caused when extracting the bone is wide, and you are sure of a pus pocket cautery, then adjust the two edges of the wound for suturing.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear a pus pocket cautery, then you use the wound with bandages and powders according to the amount of the cut in the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if pus pocket cautery occurs, then soak the cloth with vinegar and oil and water, and place it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	May the narrowing of the bone when it is a cut and its section, that you pause with plaster made of mill flour and egg yolk, and place over your stopa leon, and then place the vinegar over that area if needed, and then take a breath, so hold on to which have the Sarrazis, that is very long, and is width of it about one palm or around there; then pause powder in duplicate on the plaster and the bandage; then take a thin table stick whose width of it is three dits and similarly in length; then wrap that in cloth, and then wrap that cloth with the stick on the location over the location of the fracture; then pause breath like this until it is out, and roll that over your neck and leave your head acid, and leave your patient's thigh acid, and reduce that everywhere, and when times that narrowing of the fracture with descent, and that is not hidden under you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And altogether, so that the table does not expose the broken bone; and by yourself check that you see your thigh each day, for when the ligament is softened or you see the table already being restored, then you correct this and strengthen the bond.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then pause the sleeping of your thigh on your neck, and leave it with your patient's head in bed for at least an hour each night; so that at that point elevate the support of your arm under its elbow, and thus elevates the fracture of the sternum to elevation of the muscle; or have your arm lying by the neck of them.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not disturb the ligament if it does not happen immediately in that area or pus, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen your face up to that point, and adjust in the narrowing, restore it and smooth until it is restored and has coagulated the fracture of the sternum.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it becomes strong and comfortable according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some patients are treated within months of that time.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol. vi.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula tart is broken in that area on your side and not break it but its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken in your area — and it breaks in the middle of your area — and it is not known otherwise than through touch, then according to what is the shape of the fracture force you prepare it and reduce that according to the natural shape throughout every manner of art which is feasible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then pause on the area with flour of mill mixed with egg yolk and butter; and pause bandage with duplicate cloth powder; and then pause under your table thin board according to the amount of the spatula entirely or more than a little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	May it be that if leaving the table is concave in some of the areas of the spatula, then you fill that concavity with butter bandage, and then adjust the table according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen above with breath long with constriction decent and the tightness of the table until it is not restored at its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament each day; and in all times that it is softened, lie another treatment and strengthen it and equalize the table if it has been restored at its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And let your thigh rest on its elbow there.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in thirty.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and make sure that for that reason it is of bones from which it began not to be feared or its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed with the area of the bone and place your hand, then you cut on it, remove it, and do as we said for the fracture of the sternum in case of pus pocket cautery if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol vii.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Regarding the restoration of the ankle fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The ankle, in some cases, is broken in the middle of it and that spatula should be applied; but its ends should not be crushed or reduced.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	Of the accidents when it breaks in the middle of it is that it declines into the parts inside and happens to it a great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, weakness and nausea; and it becomes evident in the cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration consists in having him lie on his back, and place a cushion under him; and apply pressure to his muscles, adjusting his back against the hands of two, and refine the operation with subtlety regarding the patient's entire body mechanics and according to all possible methods that suit this situation, so that his figure returns as close as possible to its original state.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place a plaster and wadding on him, covering it with a delicate sheet of wax or calico and aligning them according to the patient's posture when you cover it with a cloth. And refine the application over the broken bone without causing discomfort; and adjust its position according to the curvature of your back for several rounds, strengthen that with decent ligature; and consider the wound at all times, and once it is softened, harden that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to induce disintegration or puncturing, or pain, or infection that occurs at the site, then remove and clean that area, remove the plaster, rectify whatever happens in this way according to your treatment method; and adjust the plaster if you find something wrong with the skin; and correct the ligature until it heals.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Regarding the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Understand that a break in the ribs only occurs in large areas that cover both sides; and at the ends of their parts in front, it does not cause that friction with those because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge about it is not hidden from the feeling; you must inquire about it for each of these words.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it equals the break in each of these words according to possible methods, so that it conforms when it covers, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bones with a sheet, if you need that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the break in the ribs is decreasing towards the inside parts, then it affects the patient with severe pain and puncture, just like when you have pleurisy, because the lungs take on fluid; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of undigested food; and this is hard to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already, the Greeks are skilled in such things at a young age.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And about them they say: cook the food that causes inflammation and flatulence in the lungs, so that the stomach is inflated and stretched, and the breakage is pushed towards the inside parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	Let's not let that happen through us such that it doesn't become the cause of generating pus in the cautery, if it doesn't occur; and if it has already occurred, then help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they say that it should be placed above the lungs and close to being squeezed with strength; this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the suction will draw excesses to the site due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they say that: cook until the area is covered with wool that has been submerged in cautery oil, and place powders between the ribs as it fills up, so that the healing matches when you cover it according to its curvature; and then treat the chest with the treatment of pleurisy caused by food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes intense constriction in the chest which does not tolerate it, and the lungs take on fluid due to tooth punctures, we are afraid of the chest; then cook until you cut over the site, reveal from the broken rib, and place an instrument underneath that preserves the chieftain, whose memory precedes this, and I will cut into the bone for ease, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And when adjusting the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, and heal that with plasters until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if pus occurs inside, then you should stitch it and place powdered in rotted oil on the site, and treat the chest with this method that deals with pus inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And when he is laid down over his back where he sleeps, until it heals.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Regarding the restoration of a break in the vertebral column of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some breaks can occur in the bones of the neck, and similarly to their ligaments, as well as those of the back vertebral column.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if you want to know whether it will heal or not when something like this happens to someone else, consider that if their hands are already softened, numb, and dead, they cannot make those move, extend them, strengthen them. Or when you compress those against your own words or prick them with a needle, and you don't feel pain in those, then know it is not healed; and under such conditions it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they don't like those and feel compression in those against your words and are pricked, then know that the neck of the bone is saved, and that the chest heals with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see similarities to this in the back vertebral column and want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider the feet of the person.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And if you find that they are already softened, it occurs with those what happens to the hands, and when sitting on their back, experience coughing and loss of appetite as desired. Sometimes they sit on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, therefore do not proceed with treating them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If no cause occurs from those things, then the cause is better and more mild.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure for this is that you perform a soothing of the cauterized boil wound on the lowest part of the spine, which has been torn open or by lances; place your hand on that area several times during the day until the boil cauterized.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the bandages soothingly and firmly, and press over that with strength; and command the patient to rest and be calm, not to sleep on the part where he finds pain until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that you need to remove the bone socket or any cause that has already separated from him, then cover the wound with a dressing and hold that bone; and adjust the two edges of the wound, sew if it's large; and treat that with some ointment until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if the tailbone is broken at the anus, this is the end of the penis, then cover so that you place your left hand's tip on the buttocks, and align the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible according to the second equation; and then hold over his bandage and sandal leaves, if you need those, and hold there.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken bones within him, then hold over that spot, and hold there, treating the wound with the cure that proceeds until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol .x.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Restoration of the uterus.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the wide uterus can be broken, and if they break, then the fracture is simply communication at the ends of those and are inscribed along their length; and it happens to the patient pain in that spot and punctures, and when it's a fracture, the change becomes stupefied.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of him is that you extend your hand over that area within which there is the fracture, which is the figure of him.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the extremity of him, then align that according to what you can do by equal equation until it's assembled to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	And if the fracture is in the long or already declines to the parts let him lie the patient on his abdomen until your preparation for restoring that fracture is ready.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have aligned that, place over his bandage, and then hold over the sandal of wood or of chestnut, and hold there with strength about which do not fear puncturing of fracture or displacement of the star.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And align the凹陷 with that which fills that area until that accepts the constriction according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his two sides or on his back.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	And if an inflammatory cauterization occurs, then cease the extension of him and his restoration until the inflammatory cauterization is sedated, and place there that which heats that according to what follows; and return again to the restoration of him, and hold there as you would.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it happens in the bone socket or are fractured, then you must address them.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol .xi.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Restoration of the restoration of the assistant fracture.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The assistant is that which is between the shoulder blade, in the back part of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of him can be in one of two ways, of which you take wood flat of medium size according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let there be four limbs at both ends, and it should be suspended from the raised place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient lie on one side; and then extend his broken arm over the wood until it reaches to his nipple in the middle place where the curvature of the wood is annexed.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend over that some heavy cause or the servant extends that to the parts let him do; and approach the doctor to treat the fracture with his hands until the fracture returns according to what you have done.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient lies back on his neck and hangs his arm from the collar of him with one limb; and then command two servants that one of them holds what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other has the pus below him; and each of them extends to his part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be more forceful, then hold over the fracture with one limb and over that with another limb, and each of the two servants extends to both his parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then cover so that half of the limb is placed on the nipple and the other part you should hold the bone.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is close to the shoulder blade, then cover so that the limb is placed on that spot and on that shoulder blade.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Align that with ease and proceed with your work, and then strengthen that as long as it's being aligned according to what you've done and is applied well. And if there is no inflammatory cauterization occurring.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	And if an inflammatory cauterization occurs, then smooth the constriction within the seventh day, and place over him coarse wool ointment for seven more days until the inflammatory cauterization rests, and then hold there again.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method to strengthen that is that you place bandages over the fracture, and then wrap a cloth around that bandage; and adjust his arm towards the assistant, and place his hand opened on his muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the sheet and strengthen on the assistant's arm so that the arm is in the place of the stars, or else prevent any cause from breaking the bones.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use the stars.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you should place that star over the fracture which is more solid and stronger than the other stars; and between each star place the width of a finger, and let the length of the stars according to the breakage be added with an extra three fingers from every side.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen on top of the stars along the constriction which I mentioned at the beginning of the skull.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And your constriction over the place of the fracture should be more tightened.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And as much as the fracture is lengthened, the constriction should be less.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so, if you find the position of the stars and the constriction as we have said when restoring the member to its original place, then do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear a carbuncle forming with the heat, then leave the constriction and stars for a day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And consider the circulation throughout in all directions for three days so that there is no inflammation or swelling at that place; or prevent food from reaching the member through the distribution of excess constriction; and then correct all of this according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	May it be that you are concerned about avoiding any cause of this, then do not loosen the ligature until at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's back sleep on its own, and their hands be under their stomachs.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place on the assistant's full bed of evenly spread wool, and consider at all night or day that the figure of the broken member is not healed or dissolved, or that its circulation has been softened, then correct this entirely according to your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And let the food for the patient follow the order we have presented before meals, so that the food is subtle in the beginning until strength begins; and then increase the amount of food from them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	That the strength of the assistant and the area from them is that they be strengthened for 40 days; then let it be that they are loosened, and bananas are administered which are ointments that correct that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is heated and rubbed, then do not loosen that circulation or stars for one day or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol. XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Regarding the restoration of a forearm fracture.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	A forearm is composed of two bones which are called the radius and the ulna; among them, one is small and that is what we call the wrist bone, while the other is large and rests on the smaller when it's below.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And a broken forearm can only be that of the larger bone (the ulna) or the smaller one (radius), and they break at times.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller bone (radius) is broken above, then the restoration of it is easier, and its healing is even easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the larger bone (ulna) is broken below, then the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse than that is when both bones break at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the bone that is broken is the smaller radius above, then it is convenient for the surgeon, you should restore it, that allows a small extension to facilitate when that becomes equal.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	May it be that if it is the larger bone (ulna) that is broken, then you should allow for an even more extensive extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are broken at the same time, then let it be that you perform the reduction with much more strength.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And let it be that you place the shape of the hand should restore it and the extension of it spread on a cushion, so that all parts above are considered, and the wrist bone is lower than the other bones, and the back of the hand is resting on one bent elbow.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion in front of it at the height or straightness of it, so that the back does not need to work.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And let the minister extend the arm of the part below towards their hand or circulation, and another minister extends similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then, for the surgeon to equalize the bones until it reduces that according to the best figure that can be.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are obstructions in the bone structure, then you must reduce all parts to their place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears in it a separate obstruction that hinders the continuity and is not within your hope for restoring it, then you should operate on it and hold it according to the method we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	May it be that if the fracture is in the case of an accident, I have already treated at this chapter specifically, and thus take care of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an infection with heat sets in at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with a wax-soaked and white beeswax bandage, making it medium between thickness and subtlety, strengthen the cloth over that with subtle constriction until the infection can dissipate; then keep on changing the bandages, using an plaster made from clay powder in oil, and place stars; let the star placed over that fracture be closer and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that I have mentioned the names of the arm bones in the major dispositions, or whether it is a fracture in one place or two at once.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And place your compression over the site of the fracture with strength and vigor, and when more of the compression is applied to the divisions above the fracture or to the lower parts below it, apply a little more damp compression as the memory of it proceeds in the beginning of the caput.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that wrap around the fracture should be damp and soft, not hard or abrasive. The plaster with which it is strengthened should be of a medium thickness between subtle and thick, as we have recounted.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the joint for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there arises any cause for which correction is necessary, such as what happens to the limb itself, then immerse the limb in warm water until that pain subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the limb rest without strain until it recovers, and then return the compression.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the compression has already been softened and the bone has already grown to resemble that of others, then correct all this according to your strength.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess of compression. In that case, immerse it in order to soften that slightly and let it for several days until blood flow reaches that again, then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If to the patient no cause arises from those we have mentioned, then do not immerse it until approximately 20 days or around that time.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And place the hand of the patient above their head by its strength in vigorous movements, and make them sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 45 days, or lightly restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the composition of the body and the disposition of strength.
Capitol .xiii.	Caput XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On restoration of fracture in the hand and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	And know that in the hand and at the joints of the fingers there may be fractures, but they do not occur to them without small torn motions.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when a fracture or injury occurs to the hand, then immerse the patient lying down in front of them so that they are level, and then place the hand of them over that extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And let the surgeon extend the broken bones, and the doctor equal those within that they are connected with good growth.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then immerse it while you apply plaster and stop the bleeding, if there is no pus. Then place points according to the size of the area, and you have already enveloped that in cloth for it.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the strike is in the inner parts under the palm towards the belly, then make it resemble a half-sphere of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their broken palm; then have it strengthened with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if the point of the cut is on the cloth where it lies, so that the body is applied to the palm; then strengthen that according to how you immerse.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is on the parts outside, then immerse it above points and another point of that part left in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; then return the compression, as if the hand was turned inside out between the fingers at the joint.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there arises a fracture in one of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the finger joint, make it equal as you immerse and then have it strengthened on the palm; and if you want, place that small right point so that the fracture is elevated and is not depressed.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, such as at the center point, or on the index finger, or the ring finger, then make it equal and flat at that finger where there was that; or they are all flat in continuity, which is better; or place a small point over that, as we have said about the joint.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider in your restoration and before that, the disposition of pus in the wound and opposition - during your operation - to what you immerse when a cause arises from those, according to the recounting of it.
Capitol .xiv.	Caput XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On restoration of fracture in the bone of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the thigh may be broken with torn motions, and it is perceived in the feeling according to whether it turns towards the front part or above.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done so that the muscle strengthens over the fracture and other muscles are left around the fracture, and the patient lies prostrate on their belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And let the surgeon extend all the muscle to its part according to quality, when the fracture is in the center of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If they are at the limit of the thigh, then make the muscle close to the knee joint towards its part, so that the extension covers them all, and the other muscles are left around the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the break is close to the knee, then make the muscle close to the knee and let the extension be towards the remaining parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the doctor equalizes the bones at both their ends so that you reduce that according to its natural appearance, and the bone is joined by good connection; then immerse it while applying plaster and compression, if there is no occurrence of pus in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If it happens in their abscess, then you leave that alone for several days until the abscess heals naturally, and then proceed with your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The constriction of the affected area is done: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap around the limb ensuring it reaches to the elbow and the base of the foot.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long needle between the foot and the limb close to the ankle towards your limbs, then extend the needle from the insertion point beyond both sides, and then move around the limb and foot so that excess of the bandage is removed.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And place on the foot at the spot of that fracture stars, and place one star over those bones in the limb.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And fill the gaps between the limb and foot with many layers of cloths, so that the constriction may clot.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And start with a firm constriction in the middle over the spot of the fracture using three or four layers, and as you move away from the spot of the fracture, your constriction should be smaller, lighter, and more moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend both ends of the needle to your limbs ensuring they reach into the cavity of the chest, and strengthen both ends of the stars from the other side so that the limb doesn't move out from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And leave the constriction over that area, so it doesn't cause erosion or abscess in the limb nor swelling and resembles those; if any of these causes happen, then prepare to treat them immediately. Adjust everything as we have instructed with several times of repetition.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is a gap in the bone where it should be filled, then cover such that you equalize it according to what's possible; if not, apply pressure and secure it, treating with the one who precedes the healing until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And for several repetitions strengthen this fracture of the foot in another way that fits your stars, as we have said in the manual and for arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in restoring the patient this way, do not cause limpness in the foot; and if it is restored alone, from the other limb applied elsewhere, then that part should also show limpness during its healing period.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	Know that the foot is strengthened in about ten days or a few months, and all this varies according to the diversity of the individuals and other arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Regarding the restoration of the fracture in the ankle joint.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that fractures of the ankle joint are common injuries, but they occur several times due to accidents.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If it happens to the fracture, then it's simply a crack or break in its parts, and this is from an accident or series of accidents, and on that entire matter, all is established according to feelings.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it aims to be equalized what is broken in its parts according to what was said, so that it can be added and combined as much as possible for harmony, ease, and craftsmanship.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And apply the plaster and place a round star on it, if you need that from there; and strengthen above with constriction to an extent that is suitable.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other fractures, such as abscesses and swelling that resemble those when they oppose to every injury so that it is convenient for it to heal within.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Regarding the restoration of the fracture in the limb.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the limb there are two bones, one of which is thick, and it is named as the name of the limb; and the other is delicate, and it is named easy.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it can happen to any of the types of fractures that occur in both bones of the arm, and thus the restoration is done like the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation for it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are injured simultaneously, the limb transforms into all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if it is broken with the thinner bone, the limb transforms towards the front parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if it is broken with the thicker bone, you move that limb, and these are from those causes that are not within your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And apply extension, equilibrium, and adjustment of the stars according to that equalization.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, bear in mind that if the fracture of the limb is away from the usual locations, then extension should be gentle and lighter, and support your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the limb there is an operation on the arm due to it, and when you equalize the stars and complete your entire operation, then you take weights of wood that are held by these causes which are in solidities, they are made from branches of palm; remove those towards the ones with small roughness, not with hard hands, and make their length according to the length of the limb, inside the most towards the most away.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And wrap around each cloth in two layers according to the length of it, place one over the limb part of the limb from one side and the other from the other side, have them inside towards the most away at the lowest point of the chest.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And tie the two stars in three places on both extremities and at the middle point, where this structure is not allowed to lean towards either the right or left side, staying in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And after applying a floss thread according to the length of the tendon; then place the tendon on him, so that it keeps its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially make sure you do this in a fracture, and when it comes to that particular disease.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider each day the tendon and study it from behind, and guard it against abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any cause of those happens to you, then stay with him so that your action is within what makes him heal.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the heel bone and bones of the foot and fingers.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	On the heel bone, it does not happen to suffer fractures in entirety; but on foot bones, some fractures occur; and on the fingers of the foot, few fractures do happen, and they do not happen to them unless there is predisposition during the months.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if on foot bones fracture and happens that those bones rise over themselves among each other, then the patient places his foot on a prepared ground as it is done in normal situations.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place one foot on that which rises from those bones, and press those, and apply pressure, and adjust those within each other so they return to the original locations.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then place plaster and seal above, and leave the patient's abdomen on a small table where two cushion heads are placed.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that on the foot at its descending structure, since you have enveloped that with bandages and against other causes from which you are in need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days pass for him, then you release the bandage, whereupon you will find the bones adjusted, if they are broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is as you would know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if any fingers are broken, then restore those, and adjust them as I have recommended to you in the restoration of fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the broken finger on a line according to the length of the finger, and make it slightly more elevated than him; and leave his foot on this table which I have recommended to you, and strengthen that in its descending structure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is broken from the bones are two or three or more, then you place on each finger a line of its quantity wrapped in lion skin, and strengthen the table at the very bottom of his foot, and standing on one of the table's head make him lie with his abdomen elevated so that the tongue has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes that I have mentioned to you in the other fractures of accidents we have discussed; and stay with every accident so that your action is within what makes them heal.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the knee cap and the bone in the heel and the spine of a man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the knee cap is broken, then let it be laid on its side facing down, and place it slightly tilted towards the right side, with it being held behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife places the kneecap under it, and lets him be placed as he wishes in the kneecap; and let her bend the woman down, and lift his two small ones little by little, so that everything happens as she wishes with the knee cap facing forward, and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powders on his back, and when he wants to urinate help him with ease, and let him urinate, and then return it according to the method in which you mixed that at the beginning, and return to his first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or approximately those, until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take an ointment of sheep and place a thread of flax on his knee; then immerse the whole bladder in his knee, and blow into the tube with strength so that the bladder inflates inside the knee, where the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it is filled with kneecap and stays for as many days as we have recommended, until it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone in the heel of a man or woman is broken, then administer to its restoration and adjustment what we have recommended for the thigh bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is straight is not hidden in these nearby fractures and do not happen often, especially for the one who has some study and you understand my free speech; because that fracture means to you in the major directions via of movement in its restoration and adjustment, so understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	And when the spine of a man is broken, take care of it with a guard, and put the spine in that; then place him covered with cloth, and he should be wrapped, and leave him for three days or approximately those, and heal.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of fractures when they are diseased.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for him who suffers from fractured disease, and especially if the bone is large such as that of the elbow or the humerus, or similar to those, you take care of it immediately with bleeding and syringing it right away if the conditions of bleeding are present or testify as we have mentioned above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the wound is releasing pus, then cover it with a cloth that you immerse in water where you powder over it thyme, if there is another reason not to do so.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that specific day, and do not prolong this treatment, if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If an abscess does occur with the cautery, then let the restoration of your patient happen within the first 9 days, until the abscess subsides, and do not come close to him on the third day in total, where you will cause harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the broken bone is imminent over the exposed wound, then cover it by having you forcibly reduce that and equalize it among your hands for ease and with little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If extension is not at your disposal and the equivalence of your hands among your fingers, then reduce that among your hands with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits long, and its width according to the size of the wound; and thus it is necessary for the doctor to take one of those three or four depending on what you need in total for treatment in all cases of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And if it is soft, and with little hardness so that it does not bend, you must compress it over that during the time of operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And if it has an acute tip with a margin on its own extremities; and let the upper part be thick in totality, and inside let its parts be small.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is how it looks:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It's called "labre volentz atelarem" in Greek, so it's a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that you understand that the extremity of this thing should be raised above the protruding part of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push it into a groove so that the bone returns, and it must be equalized among some levelness.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then force to equalize the extremities of the fracture among each other, and if the broken extremity is thin, and does not take that tool for good access, then cover that you insert the extremity of that bone into a place where the instrument has power over this.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bone entirely as we have recommended, then cut that with any of those scalpels which we have said; or cut it with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then take that which stands in the bone of roughness and small remnants.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone has been reduced, and upon this reduction the patient feels intense pain, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and thus let you give comfort to your patient with great kindness.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration to the bone is completed, then immerse a cloth in stoptic water, and especially if it's summer, do not apply plaster or any other cause with oil on the wound, so that it does not cause infection and deterioration.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer styes during the time of your completion to the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound exposed so that you insert it with scissors and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be careful to not strain the wound on the fracture, which often causes doctors in the past to do this, and it causes death or illness among their patients that corrodes or seriously affects them, it is health.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your tightness is slight, soft, different from the tightening of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear any harmful accidents that we have recommended, and you feel pain in this area, then do not cover with styes over this part, but make an enclosure of stiff cloths instead of styes and strengthen it around this.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And as soon as one or two days have passed and the wound begins to grow, then raise up from under the cloth which you had placed over this area in oil, and then administer calks, ointments as those that we are accustomed to heal wounds, thus like tetrarhamphacon and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is important for you to loosen the bandage and consider the wound each day in the morning and evening until it has consolidated and hardened, and cover that the member is prepared in such a way that infection runs from him to your parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound lasts several days and is not consolidated or is still covered with oil, then know that you are dealing with small ones where you should cover the wound when you apply it.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those small wounds that are separate and removed, and those that do not separate from them and put the member in place causing pain, force yourself to insert them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if it happens that the wound swells or decays, so it's styes or another type of corruption and putrefaction, then cover that you stop using one of those according to which is suitable for your treatment as previously detailed in its section.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from this point forward when you have to do the best, make your presence felt: when bone is broken and protruding, it should be on the member like the bone of the thigh and the helper and similar ones among large members, and don't assume an injury to him or the removal that happens through this causes death; leave it there where it can fall naturally about xx days or .xxx. When you see the wound, then heal it if it is visible, and if not, leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of a miscarriage that occurs in the sign of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	These symptoms occur in this miscarriage at the sign of fracture healing, especially close to joints, and it inflames the figure of the limb; and strongly you prohibit the member from its normal operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	So if the miscarriage is recent, consider administering medicines that have a stoppage effect like aloes, yew, vinegar, garlic, and onions; try some or all of them, and see which ones work when applied to that area. You should apply them on top of the miscarriage, and ensure they are bound properly for a good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the constriction without removing it for several days; then remove and repeat with another until the miscarriage heals; or reinforce over that lead sheet, as lead has a property to reduce everything that swells in limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the miscarriage has already turned and is expelled, if necessary, cause the clot to come out gradually, then cut it along the upper part of him, and remove the excess or pinch that off with some threads until it heals. Heal it while it remains healthy.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fractures when they are restored, and it is proper to manipulate the delicate member according to its natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and it is proper to manipulate the delicate member according to its natural state, this should not be done without reasons: among which one is an abundance of lymph fluid from the ligament and the action performed incorrectly; or due to excess constriction of the ligaments where nutrition cannot reach the limb; or due to excessive greasing; or due to unnecessary movement when it's not appropriate; or because of weakness in the patient's body and debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to give nourishment to the patient and make the heart of him tender until his strength multiplies in him; administer baths; and introduce warmth and joy on him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place heat on the limb, so that the heat attracts his body's nutrition, or continue greasing with fat mixed water, until nutrition flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of bent bones that are restored improperly, and you prohibit their operation according to what is done.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the member already restored is affected by healing of its deformation and enlargement of the bent bone and miscarriage, thus shaping the form of the limb, however, the member should not be prohibited from its natural operation, it only matters that you receive the word from him who exists that this member is new.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Only now do there exist many doctors and restorers who have done this in our land, and this operation is highly reproachable leading to great fear of the sign that makes one die.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If limping and miscarriage are recent, it should be that they are soaked in fat water containing soft herbs such as rue and parsley, among others; and this is done by applying the poultice of mollifying treatment similarly to how duckweed is treated well; or if it is taken with mucilage of parsley root and is wrapped in gray mullein or in camphor oil, and it is poulticed with that; or if figs are pressed with beeswax and are sewn with silk threads, among others, those like the medicines known as consolidating remedies.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some times it is dissolved with continuous light rubbing and is applied to all parts of the limb at any time.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If deformity has already occurred and been done forcefully and turned into bone and caused the need for treatment with iron, it should be that pus is above it and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and this excess from miscarriage is cut off towards the bone using fine scissors, and it is administered with care and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the topic of dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the disturbance of any joint in its place, which prohibits movement and causes the figure of the limb to be upset; it brings pain and serious injuries upon the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when a dislocation occurs, it should be done promptly to force its reduction, and not delay that reduction; if it is delayed, the joint gets stuck and makes it difficult to perform the reduction of dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this purpose, it should not be that it is swollen or stretched during the time of immobilization, which causes various symptoms to produce seizures and piercing pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, it should be that you apply the flaxseed to the patient's body, and then leave it so that the swelling rests; and place the limb in warm water and oil, and try to reduce it easily.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all limbs should be treated with what will bring back their memory to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what was preceded in fractures; from the upper part of the body up to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, leave it to do so.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So if both jaws are dislocated and cannot be handled; and the dislocation of both is performed according to two ways: that either they are gently moved back to their places by a little movement, and become somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated and fully performed, within which they are softened at the part of the joint where saliva is coming out from the patient, and she/he cannot have it nor can she/he close her/his mouth, and her/his tongue is enveloped in that.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of the patient is slight, then through major adjustments it returns by itself due to a minor cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and full, then it should be that reduction of her/his is administered slightly, and it should not be delayed in any way.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should have the head of the patient, and the doctor should enter his/her hand in the mouth of her/him, at the position of one of her/his hands on the side of the jaw dislocation within her/his mouth if it is a dislocation of one part; or he/she should enter both his/her hands simultaneously, if it is a dislocation of two parts, and the other commands are made towards the direction of her/his other hand outside which equalize; and command the patient to stop moving her/his jaws and make them go back from every side; and the doctor should adjust the jaw and insert the jaw so that it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of her/him is difficult, especially if both jaws are always dislocated, then administer sweat baths with water and oil, during which a slight reduction of both should be done without delaying the full reduction of both as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And once they return and are adjusted, and the mouth of the patient is closed and does not soften, then place over those powderfuls of drap with cerat, and do it using melted wax and oil; and let them be placed by facilitating the molten substances.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his/her back, her/his head lying between two pillows, so that she/he does not twist at the right or left part; and do not force her/him to swallow for any reason; eat her/his food carefully in a solid form, until when the pains are relieved and the jaws are no longer dislocated, then let her/him have what she/he desires.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let it be administered with ease, and do not perform any operation on the mouth during eating, drinking, and rest until the jaw is corrected and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated at any time and do not convert back to their original places, then hot baths and frequent doses of soda are advised, and strengthening the patient's digestion becomes necessary, and there should be plenty of water and an uncontrollable vomiting.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you do this, then know that it is a loss; and hot baths will kill the person to whom this happens within three days.
Capitol .xxv.	Capítulo XXV
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated within the cavity by its continuity with the bones; and sometimes it is dislocated at the site outside, which is declared by touch.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his/her back and extends her/his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And apply pressure with your palm at the spot with strong pressure, so that it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place there plaster and powder, then strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The end of that which is located on the chest and continues with it, will not be dislocated in any way; then it should be reduced and adjusted according to what we have said and according to your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And place there plaster, powder, and tightness, then command the patient to rest and have recovery until she/he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this particular treatment, it reduces the end of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capítulo XXVI
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is only dislocated in three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated at the site of the nipple to the left side.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated at the site above the muscle, which is done promptly; and it is not dislocated at the sites behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the sites in front by nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And especially it is dislocated and somewhat outside at the sites on the left of the nipple, especially in those with fewer muscles, slightly dislocated; more in those with many muscles, it goes out somewhat.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And force often happens to some people due to impact or blow, and the muscle of her/him is inflamed by a scab, and it gets dislocated because of this.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	And when you know that she/he has done this while heavily burdened by her/him, then proceed with the treatment of her/him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	You are familiar with the dislocation when you touch the parts where they should move; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and its own muscle, which you find among those variously manifest phenomena; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity and you must stimulate gently the head of the muscle like this as in a chicken, and for the patient not to be able to reduce their hand to their elbow area, nor even that one by all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated you touch the hand or on it, and then you find a clear tenderness, and it is not concealed.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation there is slight reduction when it is cool and the patient feels better.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of you is that the minister lifts your hand to its place; and then press your fingers on it gently, and lift the joint with strength in its own place, and the minister lifts your hand, and extends that one towards it; and then pause that there so that it returns slightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	Maybe if by what we have said it doesn't return, and it's due to the nature of the dislocation, a few days later, then have the patient be bathed in hot water and administered a soothing ointment that calms and lines it like if it were high wheat straw, fennel, and dill in water, and administer it.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And have the patient lie on their back and press gently with your fingers, wait until there's an equal balance between lightness and tightness, then the doctor places his hand on the spot, lifts the head of the muscle with force, pulls the patient's arm so it doesn't hurt in the affected area, and another minister holds the head of the patient's arm, making sure it doesn't get hurt in those parts, until that very soon returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce that second in this manner: and make it so there's a man present longer than the patient, who is on his side, he inserts his muscle with your fingers on the affected area of the patient, lifts your fingers up to the parts above him while the malaute hangs in the air between them, and another minister pulls the patient's arm from the affected parts below his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	Maybe if the patient is slight, then it might be that another cause is suspended, because for one that's serious, where the dislocation returns very quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced by means of another method: and you place in the ground a long pole whose head has the shape of a ball, like a mortar's handle, which shouldn't be thick nor thin, then have the patient lay with his hand extended to the affected parts on the other side; and extend your body from the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it's difficult to reduce you for all the causes we've mentioned, then use this remedy: and you take a pole whose length is that of two arm spans, and its thickness is four digits, and the roughness of it should be as in this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And have linen strips wrapped around the round head to make sure the pole doesn't hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place your fingers on the affected area of the patient, and extend their hand or arm over the pole within those parts, and hold the pole against the support and arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And hold your arm on a step ladder according to its thickness, and extend your hand to those affected parts, and the other body is suspended from the other side, so that the joint comes back very quickly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the means of you is completed according to any method that is possible for you, then have your wait with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; and have it covered in an ointment prepared from moli powder mixed with chicken egg white over all the muscle, like it's being stirred on top. And press gently on it until it becomes tight enough; and mix the mixture on the ointment, and your hand is attached to your neck, and leave it alone, making sure not to hurt your hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And have the food of the patient be minimal, during which time the member is comforted, which is easier to heal for you.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And have the food be given in larger portions around seven or five days and exercise some movement; and thus if it's closed and not softened, then already it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	Maybe if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that affects it or for another reason, then you should administer a cautery in three places, according to what was said in the section on cautery as mentioned earlier.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this has been done and after seven days the ligament and joint are released, but the plaster and stiffness remain in some areas, not closed and so cannot lift that arm to those parts above, then you should know the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is done on the feet and nipples or behind the parts, the reduction is done with pressure and extension at the hands, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And when it comes to treating that other constriction, cure it while waiting for healing.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the recovery of gravity happens close to the body part and the return of movement takes time, then the patient uses moistened clay bandages until that gravity is relieved and returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; this dislocation occurs in all directions, but more so towards the front than behind. The dislocation of it cannot be hidden whether you feel or touch it according to whatever figure it may have been dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder to its place, it is made clear to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch upon itself that muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And consider the shoulders, and reduce the dislocation as soon as you find the dislocated area. For when it reaches that hollow in your hand, reducing it becomes difficult, and if it's located at this hollow in your hand, it is very hard to restore everything, so recovery is not complete; especially when it happens behind, which among all other types of dislocation, causes more pain, and hot moistened clay leads to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is when your hand is extended between two breasts, and your arm is spread out, and the doctor's hands are on the shoulder and under you, and you push the joint against the doctor's breasts or against the edge of his palm while he returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it by bending your hand onto his hand, while hitting the shoulder against the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and forceful motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers stretch their arms, and hold this tension between the two ministers so that it does not diminish with extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate the arm entirely, because it is enveloped in folded long cloth over his hand, or elsewhere.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, grease that with some oil so that those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint for ease are facilitated; and then forcefully push the joint into pressure until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And the reduction of it comes when placed upon that mat on which stiffness and mobility are provided with lard, and stretched against the dislocation downwards; the arm should be hung from the neck, and left for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be released; and therefore if the joint has formed in its place, then you release the bandage on him and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strengthening, then you reapply the plaster and bandage, and leave it for some days until it stretches out; then release that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if gravity occurs near the reduction of the joint, and your position is in movement, then apply moistening in the bath and subtle friction, until it is relieved; or place yourself over the joint to rest on a fatty skin cushion; then bind it, and leave that on the bone during the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then hold that, and immerse that in the bath; and when it's clean, then rub the joint with seasoned friction, and then place yourself on that to rest twice, once as fat grease for movement, and then the second time, and the third time,.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already penetrated inside the body during treatment, within its limit.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, rest on that wet and scorched opening with a hot iron; and do this several times until it's damp again and returns to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow joint, which is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The elbow joint of the hand occasionally is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy. The opposite is true for other joints, but it comes with speed in the reduction of it before the hollow area stops or an applanation occurs with a heated point.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation of it is that you stop the elbow joint of the patient on a table and have one minister extend his hand. And the doctor pauses his hand or palm over the edge of the joint, and pushes that until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But it should be considered whether the palm has already been placed against the belly of the hand; then the patient should pause both of his hands on a table with extension and reduction; if the dislocation is anterior, then the position of the hand of him is inherently on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls over this edge of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns immediately, it's good; and otherwise, then strengthen that with plaster over the hollow area and leave it; and don't repeat this, for otherwise, you can neither endure nor manage the reduction of it when days have passed.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But the joint moves according to its curvature; and do not blame the patient for any cause, but only when the hand is softened and cannot endure any cause; then you should know that the nerves are injured or cut off, and then it's impossible in him unless strengthened with a cauterized area and make it endure some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	When the diseased area returns, then place on their dressing which we have replaced, and let it be left and strengthened for three days; and then gently remove it and leave it, exercising your hands upon them.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the patient's movements are still limited and cause discomfort, then apply a warm water compress and do some mild friction exercises, during which they will find relief.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocations of fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some symptoms cause dislocation of fingers in all directions.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one or more fingers are dislocated towards the back of the hand or inside them, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And next hold the head of the finger, and lift up that part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then lift that up and extend it until its length is equal to the original length of it on its second day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is morning, let him continue according to that instruction, and do not cease removing it during the day and exercising with movements, and let him rest at night; and do this for several days until it is straightened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And pretend to do so if it is dislocated in the back of the hand, let him rest towards that part and perform your first operation on it until he is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do so when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocations of the two spines.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the spines of the neck or back, and you remove the affected spine, then there is no cure for that, as death will overtake the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The sign of this is that the patient's bodily waste goes out without their will and they cannot retain it; and some symptoms cause softening of certain parts or legs of them, or on both sides of them, or two spines; or removing one spine from its place causes bleeding spots to appear and bleeding spots are made in the removal of those to four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that has already been moved behind, it is named yellowishness.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	As for the treatment of this, you should consider if the yellowishness is due to infancy; in which case there is no cure and he cannot be fully healed.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In cases that occur through injury or impact or similarly to those, the Ancient methods of treatment were detailed and extensive, as such, I have returned to the essence; however, I have briefly summarized from this for which there is little excuse for too much text due to its proximity to my understanding and exposition, with which I have laid out and organized various tools of that which I will demonstrate and explain here.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that yellowishness occurring in front of the feet does not originate from there or heal it; similarly for the one caused between two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And only that which occurs in both properly at what I have described is cured of those.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the patient should be laid down on his face with his head close to a wall, and spread out his legs as far as possible until not even his feet are touching.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And next, a stick straight should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the wall near the head, and another stick should be laid under his feet on the opposite side of the wall.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the attendant holds the stick, not making it too tight in a hole; and another attendant holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And next wrap around the head of the patient and tie them tightly with a lion's hair band; extend the end of this band to the stick which should be under his head, lay him there; and then tighten the other band over his buttocks and knees, make sure they are in line with his feet; and adjust all the bands and let those lie on the other stick which should be under his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And next the attendant extends the band at the junction of the stick, and do not move or tighten both sticks and the bands in which they are located, but rather, do not tighten them as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor holds his palms on the spine with strength until it returns; or he holds one of them on that table and next makes sure to adjust his feet on the table until they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is about three feet, and dig out the wall as we said that there should be a place for the patient between the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And next place the back of the table on the spine, the doctor places his feet at the other end, and stretches until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the one that is twisted in the hand; and it is that you place on the ground the head of the patient at the back of the wall with two sticks, their length being a foot, and place his head at the back of the wall similarly with two sticks; and make sure that the distance between each stick is a hand's width, and this has been done in each stick to pull towards which turns around, and each should be firmly planted on the ground so as not to move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there is a rod in which it twists, and it revolves on both sides of the two shafts.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the extremity of him is a rod in which the shaft is formed, its length being about as much as his hand that revolves it; and on the other two shafts there are similar ones.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the ligaments that you have tightened in the legs of the patient on the rod which is at the head of him, and the ligaments that you have tightened on his thighs on the turn which is under his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And near each turn place one minister who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor adjusts the spondyl as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the twist:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And once the spondyl has been returned and the area has been adjusted, then cover it with a poultice of dried excrescence in the album of hog's grease, and place a stop; and over the poultice lay a board whose width is about three digits or around that amount, and its length corresponds to the area of fatness, and on the part of the spondyl there.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And near it lies the ligament that we said, and use the patient with subtle nourishment so that he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any lingering concern in the area at the end of the healing, then cover that with medications that soften and clean up until the board period, which we recommended; and already an antimony leaf has been administered in that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some boils occur right at the end of the spondyls of both, and it is twisted due to that dislocation; and those bones are which already have an issue so that one should not expect any suspicion towards him with this medicine, which will cause you to experience death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol thirty-one.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the treatment for a dislocated hip joint.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the thigh and the joint of the muscle do not deserve anything other than dislocation only, and it does not happen to them what happens to the other joints with slight movement and cavities.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the thigh is dislocated according to four manners, which are dislocated towards the inward parts, or towards the outward parts, or towards the front parts, or towards the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated towards the inward parts, and few towards the front parts or towards the back parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation towards the inward parts is that when you adjust the healthy knee on the thigh, it becomes longer, and his foot becomes more prominent than in the healthy side, the thigh cannot bend his leg against his tongue, and this is where the tongue gets stuck under a cauterization burn, so that the head of the thigh bone has already penetrated here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign for those to whom dislocation happens is towards the outward parts, it is that his accidents are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign for those to whom dislocation happens towards the front parts is that he expands his healthy side according to a complement, however it does not bend that pain which is in the thigh, and if it is forced toward going and cannot do so; and his urine is retained, his tongue gets stuck, and you should place his walking on his foot.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign for those to whom dislocation happens towards the back parts is that he does not expand his thigh, nor can bend it in front where bending would touch his tongue, and his knee is shorter than the other one, and his tongue gets softened, and the head of the thigh bone should be at that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The possible reduction of the various types of this dislocation is that you consider it. If the dislocation is old and ancient, that has already happened to him with his previous handling, then when you administer this to him according to its disposition, then not in all that treatment; hence do not expect any suspicion from that treatment.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	As for the one whose dislocation is recent and of one of the four types of dislocation, then you have to return the joint and extend that towards the inward parts and outward parts, and move it to the right and left sides, which forces him back and does not require another treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it doesn't return in this manner, then prepare a strong servant and extend his healthy side from the part that you have prepared, or on his thighs, or on the ligament which is attached above the healthy part; and another servant extends his hand towards him to place his thighs under yours. And strengthen with ligaments over the tendon of his thigh, and hold another servant at the extremity of the ligament.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And for extension of him or from the inward part to the bend at the waist part, or from the back part to the part of the other.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And for all those extensions in one go, where his thigh is elevated on his body of earth and hangs down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore, if the dislocation returns as we said, it is good; and otherwise, then for every type it requires the proper treatment which we will discuss.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of his own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is towards the inward parts, then let his thigh be tucked under his buttock; and place the ligaments over the tendon of his thigh in that location where between the head of his thigh bone and the location where he gets stuck with his tongue. And extend the ligament from the side of the bend to the other waist part.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another attendant vigorously takes hold of the patient's arms, softens the large area on the bad thigh, and extends all parts outward through strong expansion, so that it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this method is for a slighter cure of the limb when it is reduced compared to other methods.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	May if you excuse me and do not follow this treatment method entirely, then I will have you place your hands on both thighs at the same time firmly but gently, evenly across both knees and ankles.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each is equal to the size of four fingers, and the bad leg should be extended more than the other by two finger widths.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the bad leg should be suspended over the head of the staff, and it should be in the left hand. And the length from the ground to him is equal to two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then instruct a strong youth to hold the foot of the bed down, and have another strong youth suspend the bad leg with him. And let the other youth pull the body up with great strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the self-reduction, when there is dislocation outward, have the bad leg move according to what we recommended during the hot bath; and strengthen the ligaments over the swollen area of the bad leg and over its ankles.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two staffs should be placed, one under the foot of him/her, and the other on top; and two adjusted staffs should be positioned halfway along the length laid out with wet cloths wrapped around them, so that the bad leg is not dampened by the staff being between his/her thighs, for you must ensure that the extension to the parts left is not pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each attendant should extend his/her part, and the doctor holds the reduction with his hand according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So, if you follow this reversal, it will go very well; and otherwise, pause on that carefully and do the same as we've said during the hot bath for that correction.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	And let the bad leg move on its knees quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the parts in front, then let the swollen area be extended slightly, and do it according to this half of the story about the body; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the back of the bad leg, and moves it with his left hand, and during that movement he keeps extending the parts left until reaching the ankle.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the parts behind, then do not let the bad leg be extended to the left and right parts, but elevate it above the ground; hold it on a hard cause such as a pillow, as when handling an egg if its width is dislocated outward, according to how we discussed his position on two widths; and it's over his face and the ligaments are stretched, as we said, almost exactly.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And let there be applied pressure on the table at the place where the joint is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So, when the reduction is completed according to what you do - and you cannot hide the signal of the reduction in him/her, which means that you extend both parts from the bad leg, and when you make those adjustments and the bad leg extends its swollen part and spreads its discomfort area, then you know that the limb has been returned as it should be. Then you adjust two things and apply the dressing and spread them out in this way so that no width is damaged in any of the parts; and keep the bad leg at rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then loosen the bandage and dressing, and compare one part to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And then, if you see those adjustments have been made evenly in his/her condition, then you know that the dislocation has already been closed, and therefore allow him/her to go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of healing, then return and plaster that area again, extend it according to your first extension, and let it rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then remove that, have him/her stay in bed for some days until he/she is comfortable with walking around.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Regarding the treatment of ankle dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The ankle can be dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outward, inward, and more to the sides than towards behind; and it is not dislocated at the front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the signal of ankle dislocation is that you command the bad leg to press its swollen part against the foot; then you know that the ankle has been dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these ways is that you straighten out the bad leg, as if it can extend its swollen part; attach your two hands to his face, and place his foot between your feet; then have another attendant hold the ankle with both hands and pull them back in their strength, while another extends his foot until the ankle returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the signal of recovery is that its swollen part adheres to the foot with ease, without causing any strain.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then plaster that area and make the swollen part adhere to the foot, and let those adjustments rest for one bend for three or four days, and remove those plasters.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Do not use the patient for walking for a few days until they are healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the patient to you is justified, then administer a strong extension of the ligaments in which there is a prior narrative about the hip's healing process.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Regarding the treatment of the dislocation of the tibia.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The tibia is sometimes slightly displaced by small movements, and in other cases it is dislocated according to the complement, and the dislocation of the patient is either caused internally or externally.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of the patient is that when the tibia swells up, moving towards the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment of correcting your displacement is a gentle exercise, and it should be done with ease on the hands and should be balanced until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When treating your case where it is dislocated according to the complement, you should make the patient lie straight down, and have a strong and brave servant hold that part behind the two of those in the middle of him.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then position your own right hand under the knee and your left hand on the lower part of the chest in the place of the groove.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the chest towards you with your right hand, and move the left side twice, and extend the left. And push the bottom of the chest from the right to work on the curve.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And perform these two movements as we have discussed.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the bottom of the chest towards the curve on the third movement, and you are at the groove.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two movements according to this method, and if you find the chest even, it's good; and otherwise, then on that condition repeat the operation, until it returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If you are prevented from reducing the patient as we have advised, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place a piece of cloth on the floor, and fix a strong pole in solid earth, and put it between the thighs of the patient, and already wrap a sheet around him to prevent slipping off the cloth.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the servant of the patient holds his thighs, and another servant extends the chest with his hands or on the ligaments that lie over the chest; and also extend each servant against their own extension side, and the pole is present between the thighs of the patient to hold him, so that the body of the patient does not pull towards the parts behind his extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the surgeon balances the dislocation with his own hands, and another servant holds the healthy thigh in the parts behind, so that the dislocation returns smoothly.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and is declared to you as healed by your treatment, then apply plaster and strengthen that area strongly with strong ligaments, and bind the chest against the curve.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And when you fear or protect yourself from the nerves which are behind over the tibia, so that the ligament over it does not become too strong and damage it strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then allow him to rest for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, strengthen that area again.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then gently move him on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If it is forced to walk in front of that space, not until the certainty that the dislocation has not dissolved and corrupted over him, then what does not receive treatment should not be done.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you happen to open an abscess cut, then know that you should administer in the reduction of him what we previously mentioned in our narrative, in another place of healing and coating until it is corrected.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter xxxiv.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	So that the one that is dislocated is balanced with a little extension several times; and what is not difficult, before it becomes easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in some joints of his foot, then know that you should make him lie with his back on a level spot or on a table, and being standing as if he was walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand with your weight on that which corresponds to the joints, and move his feet against the curve of your hand until it returns, and see him already balanced without any appearance at the corresponding spot.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then pause with the belly of his chest on a table that takes all his feet, which has two ends, and strengthen him against a firm structure for three days; and then gently move him to rest from walking for some more days until it is strengthened and assurance of improvement is established.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Regarding the various types of dislocation that may occur with inflammation or in fracture or at any time.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of those happens, and you engage in the treatment of that and restoring him/her, many movements may lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And so do not presume on the treatment of him/her, but rather, whoever is knowledgeable in this art with long use, compassionate and merciful, slow, non-impulsive and not presumptuous; who uses only medicines that allow pus to drain out completely, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, not to any other person hoping for salvation from disease, aiming for alleviation of illness, where there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And immediately strive to make him/her reduce in the beginning of the cure, before it turns into a pus-filled wound.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And when the limb returns as we wish, then administer treatment which allows for a cautery and heals the wound in such a way that is convenient to you from the dry ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation occurs like a fracture and happens in the separated bones of the skull, then you puncture their articulations, and proceed as we have said for simple injuries that precede those in these areas.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And according to your skill, follow that in the inner chamber as per the paths of fear following my instruction; this is what is better for you from your Creator, more permanent for your glory, and more healthful than those you will see in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Al-Bu'瘴im perfectly from which God may be praised.
Amen.	Amen.
