Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	The words of Albucasim begin thusly.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh children, grant me your patience as I complete this book, which is the last part of medical science, and for its completion it brings to fruition his health, and through its explanations, and through its declarations, in my view, I believe that I have completed that towards you with this treatise, which forms part of the operation with me, it is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The operation with me is reduced to our region and in our time it was entirely private, through which the risk of its science increases, and its traces have remained; and without progress from it, except a few small descriptions in the works of the Ancients, which correct the mistakes and errors among those who are confined within their explanations and extend the effort and skill.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is seen to me that I will enliven this order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so as to come upon the forms of the tools of cautery and other workshop instruments such as for addition in the declaration, and for preparation which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason for why it is not possible to find a good artisan in his own trade in this our time, is because the art of medicine is long and complicated. It requires being trained beforehand in the science of anatomy as Gualia knew about the joints of the limbs and their forms, as well as their connection and separation; he had knowledge of bones, nerves, and muscles, including the number of each and how to handle them; and also about pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places of their secretion.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And that's why it is said by Hippocrates that in his name there is a lot of work, but more so in the minor part, and greatly in the art of hands.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	And we have already mentioned this in the introduction of this book; whoever does not know what we have told about anatomy will inevitably fall into error which can cause death to people, as I have seen too many cases like that. Some are formed in this science and then leave it for another field of study and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	And I saw a skilled doctor who had applied an abscess on the neck of a woman and then opened some arteries in her neck, causing great blood to flow that resulted in her death before many could help.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who was about to swallow the gallstone of a man who had gotten stuck in his state, and the stone was large, it passed into him and dissolved that gallstone with a piece of the bladder, so that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I already tried to extract that stone, and I saw that due to the size of the gallstone and the position of the patient below him, it would result in his death.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who was taking a salary from the Duke of our country for surgery, and he ended up on a black soldier whom had been wounded in his leg; and with his lack of knowledge, he extracted the fracture from him, covering the wound with poultices and splints made of strong material, and did not allow air to escape from the wound.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And it proceeds according to his wishes, and it is dressed with bandages, and it is treated for several days as commanded that we release him. And thus when the leg and foot are infected, it ends in loss.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I tried to apply this on him, and arranged to release his tension, resulting in calmness and alleviation of his pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so I couldn't control that, and it didn't stop spreading the corruption through the limb before the patient's life could be endangered.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who drilled an abscess on cancer, and was inflamed for several days after that, during which the severity of his disease became evident to its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason for this is that the cancerous lump is pure of melancholic humor, so it does not allow itself to spread throughout completely, but rather that there's a limb being affected by which everything was poisoned.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation with me be divided into two parts: one being in operation associated with health, and another in work where there's great risk in major positions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already established this throughout all sections of this book concerning operations where errors and fear occur; so it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and refrain from telling others, lest your pages be taken out of context and mislead.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so take your weapons for the service and protection of God, and your patients for happiness and strength.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by God's grace for salvation and possible succession, and leave your terrible illnesses with difficult recovery, and keep your weapons from what makes you fear, so that endurance is in your faith and in your name does not fail: those more remain to your glory, further in the world and finally to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gualia had already said in some of his monastic sayings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat terrible illnesses with bad doctors, for it is the fault of bad doctors that one does not recover".
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have completed this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Starting the division of the work, and beginning with the first part of the first section.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first ordered chapter in the section about feet, concerning the tools and instruments of cautery and what is necessary for their operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, about drying and piercing, as well as about suction cups, boils, extraction of arrows, and matching them to those, all organized by the forms of the tools.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, about restoration and dislocation, as well as treatment of twists and matching them to those; a chapter ordered on operations in the feet, and concerning the forms of the tools.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On using fire from the cautery and acute medicine, as well as recalling the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	That is how one begins the discussion of all the body.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Let me tell you about the quality of those cautery tools and their use, as well as when it is forbidden to use a cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, the discourse about the quality of cautery needles and their materials is long and tedious, subtle in science, and secretly concealed; many great scholars have spoken on this subject and they disagree among themselves. I am content with a small part of their discourses, fearing overindulgence.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And so I say that the cautery agrees with all parts universally based on their material or multiple materials, except for two parts, which are those of the anus and rectum.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the part of the anus and rectum, there is a material that would dry out; some people say that the cautery should be used for this condition, while others argue against it. They say that it is not convenient to use cautery in illnesses characterized by their nature and dryness, because fire (or heat) and dryness are what cause illnesses of the anus and rectum to improve when treated with heat or drying processes.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who say the opposite argue that cautery should be used for any young illness of the anus and rectum that occurs in human bodies. When you compare a human body with its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is already hot.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to their discourse, something that I have experienced several times before discovering it myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, I do not intend to delve into what has already been elaborated upon in the section on cautery procedures and exercises, nor have I come to understand the diversity of human body parts and the disposition of illnesses within them, as well as their causes, occurrences, and the time periods associated with these.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other parts of the body, there is nothing to fear, especially with respect to damp and moist illnesses; all doctors are already familiar with these conditions, and they do not disagree on using cautery in such cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, about the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its benefit; this is about cautery with burning medicine. The fire itself is simple, its action only affects the member being cauterized and does not spread to other members without a small harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of burning medicine reaches there to those members from which it emanates, and strongly prompts the difficult healing of the diseased member and effectively suppresses it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	The fire, thanks to its superiority and the goodness of its substance, does not do anything except overflow. We have come to know this through experience and long years of service in studying the art and understanding its causes; thus I excuse myself for the length of my discourse, for there is no mention of it in my work about this hidden knowledge of fire, and the quality of its operation within bodies and its expulsion via which you expel illnesses, with a philosophical demonstration that would sharpen your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree about the time in which it is suitable to do cautery and pause the best springtime.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at any time because the inconvenience due to accidental delay is submerged by the youth that comes from what follows after the cautery and especially if cautery is for pain or necessary pains, strong aches and swellings which do not tolerate tardiness as feared for those causing malice, which exceeds small harm entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And do not doubt this in your minds, or, children, that which only considers the common people and lay doctors say, is that there is not an absolute time for all illnesses to be healed by cautery, and they pause at those consequences.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not that they are worried about this, because cautery is only medicine in a place where it alters the constitution and dries up the humidity which is the cause of pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But, nonetheless, unnecessary cautery in addition to medicine due to the value and virtue of its operation and the greatness of its master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it's possible that its illness could return at some point in time, depending on the nature of the ailment and the location of your illness, as well as its virtue, what has been prepared within you from the addition of excesses in you, and what is consumed by you through food and items related to those causes; unless the illness treated with cautery is a subtle illness affecting parts with few excesses and humidity. Like tooth cautery for pain and things related to that, it's possible that such pain doesn't return within you, but this happens in small cases.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	A common medical term is that cautery is the last tool of medicine, and this is a professional discourse, not something I understand in it, they believe that there is no cure that improves with medicine or other cause leading to cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The reason is opposite to that; and I understand that cautery is the last tool of medicine only when administering methods of treatment in some diseases, those medicines do not provide relief, and at the end of the cause one administers cautery, and improves with that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here it is known that cautery is the last tool of medicine, not according to my understanding which agrees with the vulgar and many doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And it was said by the ancients that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this simply because of the equality of gold and the inferiority of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And it was said that the location for cautery does not make a mark, as this is only partially true, because I have already done this and found out that it doesn't do that in certain conditions; gold cautery is good and better than iron in that case as they say; however, when you do cautery with fire using gold, it's not been clearly explained to you, since the heat depends on the quantity you want according to the strength of the gold, and what needs to be received for the process; and if you adjust the fire above it, the gold melts in the fire, and sometimes a few layers are produced that allow the artisan to work on it based on the size of that piece.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And because of this, when doing cautery with iron, you should apply it more gently and more precisely in line with the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already organized this chapter on cautery according to sections, I have organized those pertaining to the foot under it, so that I can request what you want from them.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Regarding cautery for head pain due to coldness and dampness.
Le capitol primier.	The first section.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery treatment allows the dampness and cold to cause the unfortunate incident of which there are two causes, it is the source of swelling and an abundance of traumatic fluxes, called aural flushing, from the head down to the extremities and ears, as well as all kinds of sleeping disorders, toothache, gout, and universally for any ailment that comes from coldness, such as paralysis, acidity, and apoplexy, and is similar in those ailments.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method for this cautery treatment is as follows: first, you instruct the patient to undergo a purging with an emetic medicine on their head every three or four nights, according to what suits the patient and their age and their usual practice.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then you instruct them to shave their head with a razor, and then they should apply the points on their neck on a flat surface, and place their hands on their feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then you place the palm of your hand near the nose tip between their ears.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when you have found the right location as instructed by your guide, mark that spot with charcoal and then ignite olive cautery of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that (cautery) on the marked spot under pressure, in such a way that your hand is gradually squeezed down, and you rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand gently and look at the spot, and if you see that some quantity of the head is exposed, like the amount of wax, in this case raise your hand, and if not, turn your hand towards iron or another one, if it's coldness, so that you can see from the mouth what I've told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on that spot and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place the burned stick in ash and leave it on him until the ashes of the fire are destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with tetrapharmakon ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it was said that when the wound opens up, then the mark heals better and is more rejuvenated, so it's better and more advantageous.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that when the canal is burned inside the mouth, then keep the cautery until it becomes reddened from a part of the color of the bone.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then make this mark which adheres to the bone, and then treat it well.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that when you reach the end of the cautery, you should proceed inside the mouth until it becomes strong and then the bone falls out, this is the form for small alpha cautery:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate that from that spot, vapor from the head escapes.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the wound is open for a long time, then it should be healed until it becomes consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	And yet, I have not seen these two species of head cautery in all their forms, but rather in some people according to fear; leave it as is, you should know that the best thing is with health, whenever it happens; when the head is treated by solar heat continuity of what we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head has a cool nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first species of head cautery is better saved for me, and from that point onwards, do the work with health.
Capitol segon.	Second section.
Del cauteri del cap.	From the head's cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When throughout the entire head there occurs a chronic and long pain, and this extends in the thigh for an extended period, using wars, drums, cymbals, bandages, plasters, gloves, swords, and other tools, mostly if one has already undergone a cautery with a cautery which resists these causes without being worsened by them; then consider that if the thigh of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and does not endure much friction or fatigue; then this cautery should be repeated again; and the other leaves a small one to the first.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And place that one on the patient's forehead with an inner cautery, where the disease is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Make an incision and expose the amount of disease from the mouth that we have recounted, then apply cautery to it with a cautery in the rear part behind the head at the location which is called the artery -- and this is the area where suction is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And comfort your hand with aloe, and do not expose the mouth, for this patient undergoes great pain from this method differently than the pain from all other head cauteries.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say this about this cautery in its location, for it seems that the cautery with which you apply to the horns of the head and the occiput is more subtle than this one which applies to the middle part of the head; and this is how he does it.
Capitol ters.	Headache resolved.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Regarding the new migraines cautery treatment.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is pain in the rear part of the head or an internal pain in the skull, it should be treated with medicines that cool and calm the head. Then we apply the other treatment, which I have mentioned in treatments for illnesses of the head; without exaggeration, then the new migraines cautery procedure involves two methods: one is to use a cauterization with an acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	When using a cauterizing medicine, you should take a dollop of alum, heat it and then apply the softened ends to both parts of the head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And place the location of the pain in the temple with a small needle where it was cut open, and leave the incision closed.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And strengthen over it with the stoppage of descent due to contraction, and release that by the spaces of three hours; then wash off and dry the alum, and leave the wound for two or three days, and place your hand on its back submerged in water until the spot turns red.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And heal that with ointment where it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you see this, do as I have written about some burning medicines in my treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The cautery using iron is as follows: heat it to the degree of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And this is called ironing on the head, which makes the head appear like a thorn with some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small elevation.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And place your hand on the location of the pain, and rub it - so that you don't burn the skin which is left - and slowly rotate the small iron with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity that gets burned due to the intensity of the pain is more than half of it, raise your hand so that the artery which is left isn't burned, so that no blood flow occurs.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak the cloth in salt water and place it over the area, leave it for three days; and afterwards place the moist cloth on water, and treat with ointment once it's healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see this, apply the cautery at the end of the surgical blade according to the old method, and be careful not to cause an arterial incision in this new migraine.
Capitol quart.	Headache resolved for the fourth time.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Regarding the old migraines cautery treatment.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines with what we have discussed about the previous treatment and in the divisions of headaches, without exaggerating the treatment, due to this headache not being enough for what we have said regarding the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, it seems that you should ignite the surgical blade until it becomes white, because place your hand on the location of the pain at the line of its length which is most relevant in our discussion or do so; and then rest your hand for a moment and press there while you incise the skin and go into the skull.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone which makes chewing difficult, and that the wound not be burned and the nerves that are sensitive to this, and that there does not occur muscle spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it's about the custody and caution of blood flow from the artery that is cut, where there is fear at the cut, especially to those who don't know what they are doing and aren't studious and anxious; leave the operation as it was begun.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will recall here the regulation of blood flow in case of an accidental cut to the artery according to this method, in its place in this text.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this headache that doesn't satisfy this cautery and sees the skull tolerable, apply this cautery in the middle part of the head as we recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, apply the cautery we have mentioned for the tip of the scab on the heel's surface with two needles, and this is better cauterization and more beneficial.
Capitol .v.	Head / top
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Regarding the cauterization of earache.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold and other causes as I mentioned in the division, and if the pain isn't relieved by this cure, then apply fire to the cautery, and this is what we call 'pointed' cautery, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And place the point near the heat source, and let it touch around the entire ear area like a wheel is turned, or in the circuit of any moments if the pain occurs anywhere.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Continue with the ear cautery little by little until you have identified and tried the place.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery hits all these points on the ear, and you find that place, then properly treat the areas inside where they are healing.
Capitol .vi.	Head / sixth
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Regarding the cauterization of back pain.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Back pain which is treated and in cauterization consists only of the species that I mentioned as causing pain due to phlegm, according to what we have discussed in sections on illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization for the species that causes due to dryness or muscle spasm of nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of back pain with dyes and head baths and sweat-inducing remedies, and if your treatment doesn't agree, then follow this method when you cauterize the patient: the first is for the ear, the second slightly less so, in its warm zone, and the third is for the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cauterization on the opposite side of the back problem, where there's only a soothing effect in that area that turns healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cauterization is to apply it on the tip side of the ear's end with a little above the corn of the head, and on the warm zone, its length according to the length of the said hand, and then pause your hand when the quantity corresponding to the species' essence is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is how it's done with a cautery tool, which is a speciality of surgeons, the shape of which is explained on table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it's more subtle that you should do this with a few; and when the needle is in its superfluous thickness, just do a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area until what was done in process turns healthy.
Capitol .vii.	Head / seventh
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Regarding the cauterization of old apoplexy (stroke).
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but your medicine doesn't agree with the patient and they don't have fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: over all parts of their head; and on this head's side like we said; and also do it in the throat.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The method of cauterization is done according to what has been mentioned before.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And when it's cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and more towards the rear; and then treat with what is being done.
Capitol .viii.	Head / eighth
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Regarding cauterization caused by phlegm leading to forgetfulness.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	And ensure that the patient is given large doses of dyes and pellets for improving memory.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the entire head of the patient and place on their chest the center part of the plaster described in the book about plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And let that burn for a few times; this is the method of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Do this according to that order which I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if these heal well then; and otherwise, then do three cauterizations at the rear part of their head, which descend from the top part of the head down to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cauterization for the duration mentioned; and then treat the area after what has been done.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	And if you feel your tolerance for the patient increases, then do this cauterization in the middle area; and if your tolerance is greater, then do the cauterization over both parts of their head.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And treat that until it heals; and let this olive oil be used according to the method shown in front.
Capitol .ix.	Head / ninth
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Regarding cauterization and soothing of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	And ensure that you proceed with body purification by dyes and as we have said; then shave the patient's head, and then apply this cauterization method by doing it in the middle of the head, do it over both parts of their head, and do it at the rear part for them, and do three cauterizations on their neck spines.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it's necessary in the illness of body soothing due to too many patients and the illness is strong, then apply this cauterization method by doing it on both neck spines four times, subsequently do it until the essence of the medicine burns out from their body, and lift your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And treat that area until it heals; and this is olive oil cauterization.
Capitol .x.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Regarding the treatment of epilepsy through cautery.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not the person with epilepsy who is treated with cautery, but rather epilepsy caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And so when you begin to modify the brain of the patient at the onset of their years and in another cure which we have described in the division when the patient is sickly and tolerates the inconvenience of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it's a child who doesn't endure the medicines, then he administers gargles and chewing stimulants to strengthen the brain modification, before that for several days, with the improvement of the food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and then apply a cautery at its correct location on the head according to the previous method, and apply another cautery on the back of their neck, and over every hairline of their head they apply a cautery.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then apply the cauteries I've mentioned, while having a paralytic effect and body softening on the cervical vertebrae and the vertebral column of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And an olive oil cautery as it is described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Here comes the translation for "Capitulum XI."
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Regarding the treatment of melancholy through cautery.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are dampness corrupted and phlegm thick, then apply a cautery with the cauteries we have mentioned in anticipation for paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is wet, then give them to drink what modifies their brain according to what was preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the patient's head, and then make a decent tortoise shape with it over the circle, and then remove that in the middle of the patient's head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And when the patient is sixty years old, they should be treated from every part.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply liniment; and it's more worth using an old sheep grease.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire for a warm heat to measure, which the patient should endure when it becomes more in them.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that in the middle of the patient's head in the circle, let the patient stay in until it cools down.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this for the patient every week once, under their other treatment until they are cured; or if you want, apply the cautery make small punctures according to what is best for them, otherwise keep your hand on a prepared cautery: this is the type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then leave that cooked meat in wool grease or fat for some time.
Capitol .xii.	Capitulum XII (Chapter 12)
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Regarding the treatment of water descending into the womb.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared that the onset of water in the womb begins according to the symptoms I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink what modifies their head, and keep them away from all dampness.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let that sugar dissolve in hot water for a few days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command the patient to raise their head, and apply a cautery on the middle of the head; and then apply two cauteries on each temple if it is the beginning of water descent in both wombs, or one if it's the beginning of water in one womb.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Let the cautery touch all veins and arteries that are left after cutting; and let the cauteries be in that length around the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard against bleeding when it's being treated with cautery; and if you see the patient's bleeding, give them any medicine that is within your capability.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with knowledge about the removal of arteries and about removing those, as well as caution against bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And in some cases it is treated by applying cautery to the neck after the two bones have been cut with two successive cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitulum XIII (Chapter 13)
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Regarding the treatment of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the wombs are old and occur through veins and arteries which are in the visible location on the head outside, and it is confirmed that this is excess phlegm, then apply a cautery with the one we recounted for the beginning of water tears occurring in the wombs; and apply a cautery in the middle of the head and two cauteries at each temple where there are temples. And apply two cauteries on the neck after cutting the two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you suffer from addition, then apply a cautery over the entire length of the back of the womb on the tip of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitulum XIV (Chapter 14)
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Regarding the treatment of nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you are treating with what we have described in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare and give to the patient three cups of wine over night; and then shave the head of the patient, and apply an olive oil cautery on the head.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then apply a thorn cautery on each eyebrow, leaving a small space between them.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And protect yourself from the fire so that you do not burn that area.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And for this type of cautery, this is how it's done.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	About the cautery treatment for the eyelids of animals.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of an animal is swollen or damp due to disease, then apply this type of cautery to that eyelid; and here's how it's done:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do this, apply the cautery over both eyebrows for a short time in every part, and make them extend to the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand too much onto the cautery, but according to how much of the eyelid's tip part is heated.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	About the cautery treatment for an animal's eyelid when its skin turns into parts within and around the paw.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of an animal turns into parts within such that it affects the entire body, two methods of cautery are applied to those areas: one is a hot cautery and the other uses burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you use a hot cautery and the animal's skin behaves as if it were being shaved by those who do so in the world, that is, until they are prolonged and made equal; and if you touch its birthplace, then strengthen your hands on their flesh so that no burn occurs before their skins emerge.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Once they are prolonged and made equal, then place the animal's head in your hand, and place your finger on their eyelid as if you were trying to see it, marking the spot according to the shape of a holly leaf, and make the beginning of the mark close to the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And place your finger dipped in animal album or in pus from gallstones on the animal's body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And heat the cautery like this, which is how it should be done.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And heat it up and apply the cautery to the marked figure, gradually and in small waves, until the surface of the skin appears as if it were a holly leaf, completely burned away.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And as a sign of the animal's health, you should see that the eyelid of the animal has already contracted and its skin is raised from the point where you made the incision on the animal.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And lift your hand and leave it for three days, then place your finger on its edge until the scab is fully formed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And treat that with ointment until it has healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	And if there is any reason that affects them near their birthplace and the eyelid becomes swollen, then perform another treatment with the cautery over that area just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the skin is still in the eyelid after that, then apply the cautery until it rises to its natural place and becomes equal, ensuring that the skin does not hurt the animal.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And for the cautery with burning medicine, this is what you should command the animal to do: have its skin prolonged and made equal until it emerges, then make the mark of the holly leaf shape from parchment paper.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take known soap and live vinegar to prepare this treatment. 1., Do this, and mix those substances well in water, prepare it quickly so that it doesn't cool down; spread this mixture on the parchment paper which is made in the shape of a holly leaf, place it over one animal or both; dip your hand in animal album and the head of the animal should be in your hand.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place that over the medicine and press it a little but do not burn him while he feels the bite of the medicine, which is like being bitten by fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when he continues to feel the bite of the medicine, then remove the medicine and place it in your hand; once the biting stops, then reapply the medicine with water; and then consider if the eyelid has already been lifted as it would be washed away by fire or incision, which is as you should do; and if it doesn't come back to the place of the medicine on the spot where no medicine was applied and does not descend until your operation is fully equalized and the animal's head has contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And place your finger on its edge until the scab of adjustment is eradicated; then treat that with healing balm or another until it has healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And for this, you should keep watch over your operation with diligence to ensure that no medicine falls onto the animal's head; if the eyelid becomes somewhat swollen and causes any skin problems around it after some days, then apply your medicine again to that area where the eyelid is swollen, exactly as you did at the beginning, surrounding it until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of the holly leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	Know that the eyes of humans vary according to size and thinness, so your treatment should be done accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the path towards rectitude for him towards whom this art is directed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of the cautery of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with what we've said in the divisions of illnesses and do not apply your treatment, then proceed to cauterize that according to this method: instruct the patient to hold their head on you as if it were a seat, and place someone's hand between your hands like they're supporting something so that neither is too heavy nor agitated under their head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And place the point of the instrument in the pus in the eye or in mucus on the patient's nose.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And heat up the cautery with which this is done:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which should be conquered, like a cane or reed of a bird's quill in shape, from one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see that it can penetrate to the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, act in such a way as to test.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But whoever is conquered is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And press the fistula if it has opened, and extract and dry out that which is from the patient.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it hasn't opened, then open it and remove the pus from the patient.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And place on the patient the heated cautery which is slightly hot, and hold your own hand next to where you're going to apply the cautery to the nose, so that neither your hand nor the patient becomes agitated. Then pause the cautery over the gray area of the nose and burn it there.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if during the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the nostril, then that's good; and otherwise, then apply the cautery once or twice, as needed; leave that there for three days, and then place a point on that spot with a bandage around it, and apply drying ointment inside so that it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if it has passed ten days and is not healed, then place on the patient a corrosive acid medicine inside where the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what suits in their skull.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula that some earlier people described: hold on to the site of the fistula and make it there, then pause at that crack and place a fine point like that which suits: And in that place put an amount as large as one inch of melted lead; hold your hand there with good control, so that the patient doesn't feel too much pressure that the melted lead doesn't penetrate into their nose; proceed to pause on the edge of the patient's nose like pus in the eye or water, where the lead then sticks to the site of the fistula and heals it through marvellous treatment.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed according to what we have said about cauterizing and treating it, then that's good; and otherwise, then it becomes necessary to administer nasal drops and reduce the fistula into the nose according to where it naturally belongs.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cautery of a cut under the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Redness and swelling often occur with cuts (fissures), especially in the labia of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Then, when you treat those cuts according to what we have said in the divisions and do not improve your treatment, then heat up the small cautery knife according to this method that suits:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its size follow the subtlety of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that initial incision within those cuts where the cautery penetrates to the base of the cut.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with bandages until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When there is pus formation in the uvula or on the palate or at the tonsils leading to an abscess, and it bursts, becomes old, then bleeding occurs and a fistula is formed. If you do not improve your treatment for this, proceed as follows: heat up the cautery according to the amount received within the fistula, insert the heated end of the cautery into the pus-filled sac, place your hand where the hot tip reaches inside the fistula, and perform this once or twice at its rear; then treat it as we have said for treatment until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the healing is complete and it has healed, then that's good; and otherwise, then it becomes necessary to discover the location and expose the bone according to what suits its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cauterization of teeth and the soothing treatment of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth are softened, when you treat those with medicines but do not improve them, then place the patient's head on your seat as if it were resting. Then heat up the cautery according to this manner, so that you pause your hand above the tooth and intervene there with the heated cautery moving quickly, and hold your own hand slightly inside where the heat of fire reaches the base of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and proceed to apply the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the sick person drinks water with salt and keeps that for an hour, and afterwards he stops it, until the tooth pain is alleviated, the gums are softened and the moisture in the mouth is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the application of a cautery to tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to cold or worms, or if the treatment does not work with medicine, then apply a cautery to that in two ways: either on the edge of cattle, or directly on fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Applying the edge of cattle means you take a cow's horn and heat it in a forge, then hold it close to the tooth area, apply pressure and wrap it around the tip of the needle, then immerse that in the heated horn and place it over the painful tooth as quickly as possible until it is hot.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat this process several times so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see that, soak wool or cloth in the hot horn above it, then place that over the painful tooth, and hold the glowing iron on it until the heat of the iron reaches the root of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cautery with fire is that you wait until there's a lump of ember or iron core, and if there are any roughnesses and the heat of the fire does not reach inside the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then heat the cautery to its desired shape, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is hot; do this a few times so that the pain lessens or by that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And know that by the force of that cautery which the patient swells their mouth with good horn and keep that for an hour, then they drink it; this is the way to apply the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply the cautery to whatever you see that can be treated according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is how it looks like with respect to the catheter:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the treatment of hernias with a cautery.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are due to phlegm and wet humor that don't respond to digestion through medicines, if you notice a slight improvement in their digestion, then heat the cautery according to this form: having two round ends so that the smoke from one end burns the cautery on the other, place the ignited cautery over the lesion once, or another if you need it until it reaches the root of the lesion.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the lesion is small, then place the cautery according to the amount of the lesion, and leave it on for three days and apply a heated cloth over it while the area has been treated by fire.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointments, bandages, and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The form of the catheter or the cautery should be such as to allow this process.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the treatment of coughing and constriction in the throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture invades the channel of the lung, especially when it comes from cold body fluids, know that the patient should be emptied at meals with laxative medicines, and then apply the cautery to the site of stagnation in the area below the throat.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And watch that you don't apply the cautery to the throat nor burn until the end of their pain, just a little bit.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And apply the cautery to another cautery located at the junction of the neck and lower part of their back.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The application of the cautery for the arm should follow the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with what has been described until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the treatment of lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung illness are due to moisture, if the patient does not have a fever or congestion and it is an old cough, then apply two cauteries on the sternum at the sites of stagnation in the chest and back; and with another cautery in the middle of the belly between the breasts; and for arm cautery follow the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cautery treatment with the cauteries called puncta follows the form described in the puncture of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points among them; and then treat that with what has been described until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And each cautery has three stages in which the treatment is done on that: you can do three applications of cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the treatment of the teat tip, which is the head of the teat.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the tip of the teat is displaced due to lubricating moisture and does not return immediately upon its usual return time, know that you should first reduce the displacement, then have the patient lie on their back or on their stomach; and then lift the head which is at the beginning inside part of the teat tip, and raise the end that corresponds to your left hand's fingers from above those points of your left hand if the junction is displaced internally.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then prepare two points for the cautery; this is how it works:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then apply the cautery between where it enters that into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come as from two points of cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and that is subtle according to the amount of heat; and this is how it works:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes applications are made according to this count, and for what purposes are the cauteries. VIII.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place on the cautery some salt powder, and place the patient on their back, and let them lie still until they are comfortable after some time.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and below the knee or ankle, then apply cautery over the muscle at the cautery point or on bone points, where the joint is confirmed and moisture is reduced, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the treatment of stomach cautery.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and moisture enter the stomach causing an increase in its size and multiple swellings within it, and if you continue with the curative methods without improvement, then you will find that the patient is on their knees, and they stretch their hands and things, and apply cautery there for three points: leaving the foot at the size of a hand's length at the point of knee cautery, and at two points between the sides of the stomach cautery, forming the figure of triangular cautery; extend among those that are not fitting to make them fit.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the thickness of two thirds of the thickness of the intestines.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if you want the figure of the cautery according to this form is added, and if you wish, apply large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; here is a cautery according to the circular form as follows:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And apply stomach cautery at the point that is afraid of this cautery: and you place on the stomach point according to the amount you want with heat, and then apply cautery at this point; and treat it with treatment which proceeds until it heals.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the treatment of bile duct cautery.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the bile duct due to coldness or moisture or excessive wind that causes it from exceeding its normal size, and the patient heals with what we have said and does not improve, then you will find that the patient is on their knees, and you place heat at three points according to this form over the bile duct halfway between the inguinal areas, in the position of a person lying down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the right side of the body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not touch with your hand on the surface of the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of water that is absorbed equals the size of the intestines' swelling, and it's not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they're not standing, then they should lie down, which has already stretched their limbs, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it's possible for you to apply these cauteries with surgical knives, when you have skill and caution in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overdo the cautery treatment, and ensure that the swelling of all the intestines is absorbed so that it heals throughout the body and reaches into the intestines which are delicate; know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On perforation of bile duct abscess with cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is inflammation or abscess in the bile duct and you want to know if that abscess is within the bile duct tissue or outside of it, then if it's within the bile duct tissue, the patient feels severe weight and pain becomes more intense.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it's within the bile duct wall, the pain is severe and often times already tires out the doctors in treating him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	So you will find that the patient is lying on their back; and then mark the site of the abscess with heat; and then apply cautery where it resembles a rag, which we described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And apply cautery at this point and within the entire intestine, until it reaches up to the liver, until you can see that it is healing.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it for curing other abscesses until it heals.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this form of cautery treatment other than that which is studied in the art of medicine and extended, and those who have knowledge of many maladies; however, some experiences may burn on these operations, yet you should follow this one, and it's better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the treatment of ulcers with cautery.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient methods of applying cautery to ulcers were done according to this manner, which you should take from the rules of aristology. It involves taking a longish, dried out length of an animal horn found, whose thickness corresponds with that of your finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and heat it at the fire, and apply a cautery on that spot which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the chest; and with two cauterizations place them diagonally, one slightly downward towards the area under the chin, and with two cauterizations there where they are diagonalizing between the fifth rib and the sternum, directing one slightly backward; and apply another cautery in the middle of the foot; and apply another on the stomach, and apply three cauterizations at the back parts; and place a cautery in that spot which is between the two shoulders, and apply two cauterizations on each side of the foot, making sure to direct the cauterization between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover where you place your hand at the cautery, but show it in action to the patient.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And also, as some old doctors and the men of their time used to place a metal rod that looks like a ray and fire at this cauterization spot, they would insert it into this location between the ribs, until it reaches this wound inside, healing it, just as we have described in the wound of the stomach.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	Fear not about this cautery hole, for it is not the danger that you are currently experiencing in the fissure where healing does not occur.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the process of cautery for the uterus.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the illness of the uterus as we have discussed for treatment in division and do not apply your own treatment, then when it comes to applying cautery to her, there are three methods, all of which are perpendicular. One method is to make three or four lines of cauterization along the length of the uterus according to the shape of the stomach's cauterizations, as I have previously described.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery the thickness should be about one finger or a little less, and the method of applying the cautery is the same method we described for the stomach's cautery equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not let your hand touch the cautery; and place the patient horizontally on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to apply cautery, which involves igniting the cauterizer with two streams of fire, a method that we have discussed in the chapter about dislocation of the muscle, and raise the spine which is aligned with the course of the uterus so as to guide the patient's left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation is at which you raise the spine according to the length of the body, so that cautery lines are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert both streams inside, ignite them, in that space where the spine from the other side penetrates.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus it is done four times.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see fit, apply cautery using a three-streamed cautery.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you treat the healed cauterization that has not allowed bleeding for too many days; and more is to be considered than other previous causes in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the process of cautery for dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Apply cauterization not in cats, but properly to the limbs.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat dropsy in the ways of treatment as we have described in division and do not apply your own treatment, then cover that area with four cauterizations around the umbilical region, and one on the stomach, and another on the abdomen, and another on the stomach. And place two cauterizations between the two hips, and a cautery on the right side of the foot, and cover another area on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the thickness of the spine.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then smooth out the cauterization until it allows bleeding for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not discharge the patient of treatment near the cauterization as you would with someone who needs two consultations, and it is prepared for help in healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cauterization on which it is applied to the belly should be a bow according to how that shape follows what was previous, and that one on which it is applied to both sides is an olive according to its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the process of cautery for the limbs and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen with water and filled with watery pus, then cover that you apply cautery on the back of the foot up to the point between the thumb and little finger, and raise your hand near the cauterization without twisting it; and then raise your hand, do not return that all at once as the watery pus drains.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Apply the cautery in this manner: And then make two cauterizations on each thigh, and for every part, make a cauterization at the tip of the blade.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And make the cauterizations according to the length of the thigh: place one at the knee and the other in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauterizations.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And keep the open wound treated for a long time so that some pus can drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat those causes as we have described them.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the process of cautery for abdominal regions.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When abdominal pain is due to friction and moisture that harden the organs, it is the digestive and retentive functions, which are in the stomach and intestines. This is treated with methods of treatment, without causing any damage, and sometimes the patient suffers from a vertebra burning, then burn it vigorously on their stomach according to what preceded during stomach cauterization, including around the belly button and four cauterizations in the loop of the subtle iliac vessels, including a small keyhole cauterization; and cauterize above the navel for a while or apply two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you notice excessive moisture and the patient tolerates it, then burn that on the pubis and on the intestines, strengthening with two cauterizations around the stomach and near the groin, which is a complete cure of youthful illness without error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are of a nature to produce ancient hemorrhoids or those from large humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated as we have said in the division without damaging your treatment, then cauterize with three cauterizations on the pus left at both ends of the small and small triangular pieces. And apply a cauterization above the navel cavity for two dits.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that the stomach of your patient is chilled and the food is not digested, along with swollen cheeks, then burn on the stomach with a large cauterization as it was done previously; and apply one to the chest, and another on his face. Apply a small keyhole cauterization, and allow the cauterization to cool open for some time, and then treat your patient until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization near the location of the appendix.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the appendix, then you apply the cauterization that resembles a ray's flame.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place the ignited tool in the appendix's location of removal, and finish your hand's movement so that the cauterization reaches the opening of the vein from which the disease flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this one or two times; if the appendixes are too many, then cauterize each according to what we have recounted, and treat those with your remedies until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you apply a large cauterization on the bellybutton, it's more likely to result in illness during youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are naturally formed in the parts of your patient.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	If nature does not comply with the work that we have recommended in its place, and your patient is frightened by this, then they will be healed through cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	So when there is some fistula in nature, and it is old, infected by healthiness and corrupted moisture, then that which is pus worthy of being covered should cover that with the small attempt, and you will know the depth quantity of that beforehand through the said attempt.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Place the cauterization tool that resembles a ray's flame.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then place the ignited cauterization tool in this fistula, and according to the quantity where the attempt has reached.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And apply the cauterization over that until those corrupted bodies are burned completely, once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And guard against the burning of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder's body or to the intestine, then guard all those places. Do not do this unless the fistula is in a fatty area and you consider that it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And treat the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and all materials have been removed from your patient, yet it still lasts for a long time afterwards, then know that it has been completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not completely removed from your patient's body, then you should know that it is penetrating or in some part of its organ, or originates from those causes which will bring recollection in its location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of ulcers.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When ulcers exhibit pain due to friction or large windiness, and the patient's cheek becomes reddened, then cover that by applying a cauterization on each ulcer with a small keyhole cauterization corresponding to the recall of its memory.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strongly apply the second small area, so that three linear cauterizations will come about, and thus are more likely to occur during youth.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When it happens in the bladder with softening and moisture that makes the patient not retain urine, then cauterize it on the part of the leftover at the bladder opening, as it starts from the skin of the pubis, cauterizing with one cauterization on the right side part and another on the left side of your patient.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cauterization according to the size of your patient's foot; and cauterize that with a cauterization on the lowest part of both sides; or do two cauterizations if it is necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And apply small keyhole cauterizations as they are instructed.
Capitol .xxxix.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Regarding the treatment of the anus through cautery.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is venous congestion and moisture in the anus, and thus intercourse is forbidden, her menstrual cycles become disrupted and delayed in coming, causing discomfort during bowel movements. In this case, it's recommended to perform three rounds of cautery on the area around the navel, as we have explained with bladder cautery; also place a round of cautery on the spot opposite the anus, or two cauterizations if necessary, making sure that the cauterization is deep enough.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the ankle through cautery.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture accumulates in the ankle joint and causes distortions to its location, indicated by a longer foot when compared side-by-side.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the site of the dislocation is found on the inside of the ankle.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then proceed to perform a cautery on the ankle area above the ankle joint of the patient using an oval-shaped cauterization, once you have tested this method along the circuit as it is wound around, and so that the ankle falls into its proper position in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And similarly to the shape of the previous cauterization in the stomach treatment.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cauterization is not available to you, then perform it with three rounds of large olive-shaped cauterizations.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the cauterization should be done according to the intensity of irritation throughout the entire chain; and then attend to that part where it is being healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Regarding treatment through cautery of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle joint, which is caused by friction and moisture, the treatment we have described for this applies to the patient without causing them discomfort, so return the affected part of the body to its normal state. In doing this, you should release the ankle from thick fluids either through pillowed fetid substances or artificial pills or similar treatments; then proceed to perform cautery on that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of applying cauterization in such cases follows two methods: one using burning medicines, or cauterization by fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	There are two scientifically recognized methods. The first involves performing three triangular cauterizations on that part of the ankle, as shown here, with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And for the distance between each cauterization, it should be the size of your finger, using large or very large olive-shaped cauterizations.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Make some burns on the middle part above the ankle joint, resulting in four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, perform a circular cauterization as described in the treatment for ankle dislocation, which should cover and burn throughout the entire chain.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is how cautery should be performed when pain is localized around the ankle and not spreading within the foot.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if the pain spreads within the foot, then perform two cauterizations on the foot near the spot where you have encircled the ankle that is causing the pain; and make one cauterization along the heel for four fingers down from that spot towards the inner side of the foot.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if you use a knife-shaped cauterization, the depth of the cauterization should correspond to the intensity of irritation throughout the chain.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the ankle wraps around where pain is spread out in the foot area, then perform cautery here at the location you encircle with three points or four or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the ankle wraps around causing pain to be left out of the foot area, then perform a knife-shaped cautery here.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And remember that when performing any cautery, do not finish it to the point where you burn nerves or large blood vessels, because this could lead to damage or constriction on the ankle.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen one and another of those who perform cautery on the heel and conclude in the process, with the fire-filled bed that leads to swelling at the foot, burning through and corrupting the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And inevitably causes intense stomach cramps, resulting in death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain occurs in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones say that in ankle cautery, this is how it should be done: make it resemble a circular iron tool where the circumference is as wide as your palm; and position its opening according to the thickness of a finger bone or roughly one or so.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle place another line; and the distance between them should be equal to your finger's width; and let those lines mark out two parts each; and the length of those marks should be one finger or two fingers wide, make iron grooves decently in those circles; and this is the shape you'll follow:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And light it in the fire until it becomes red and sparkles; then place it over the ankle area, making sure the hot part is touching the inside of the foot.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then perform three round cauterizations in one go on that spot.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that area smooth for three days; and after that, cover it with bandages and let the open wound heal over many days; and then treat that area with ointment until it heals.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Using Al-Bucasis: oh children, for this type of cautery we have used them in the examination of its patient, and because of these we found those that watch over it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Suggestions for the pains caused by deep cauterizations in him who suffers them, and finds that place on him.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Suggestions for cauterization in medicine, it is that you make two circles on the arm with a perforated needle where the gallbladder's duct lies; let their length be as long as two walnuts or hazelnuts.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each part of the said amount of fatness; and open them below and above, so that they contain themselves among them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And if you place your hand on the part of the water where the patient is lying, on his back; and hold your hand on the part of the water. And take hot water from it and apply it between the two circles, and let its quality be like a small fire gradually, and keep that for an hour's worth, and allow the patient to chew and adjust - as if he were eating with fire - until the chewing stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And hold your hand near the instrument and remove all the hot water from the entire body with cool water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And let him lie for three days and place your hand over that lump until the color of the adjustment is improved, and let him rest like this for some more days, and remove his fever; this happens in youth.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And treat that with ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is spread throughout the thigh or the chest, have him stand where he contains water as is done in the equal water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about that in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and of the undying ashes of one part each, mix them together in a new wave where the part you leave is pierced by a small rod, according to the amount that fits into his skin.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And let him lie in the bottom of the wave another wave in succession, get on top of that live alkali and ash with lukewarm water which takes those by the inch, and when you compress them onto your own hand for good compression, leave the heat that comes from hot water on the part left on the heated wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And adjust all that water, and get it on another live ash and new alkali, which will have great strength soon, this is administered in movements of surgery and in the cauterization of other limbs, which operation involves fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And among some medicines which are to be cauterized like this, such as pungent ones and salted honey and ash in a moistened state that need to be mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And this is the procedure that a man from antiquity used for surgery and treatment which heals water pain and sciatica pain, and make it clear this method is so beautiful, saying it does not require any other treatment, and when he is healed just like this, let him bathe and rest as instructed by you.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if it is close to a vertebra dislocation, and if there is no trace of vertebrae, take a recent fig; and finely grind it with a little grey and place it in water where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and bind him.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And leave it for the amount of three hours or until the patient notices improvement in adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And take him to bathe and when his body becomes red, insert him in the sun, for when the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Know that it should not be used by anyone to cauterize with these medicines but only for the body's evacuation.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Suggestions that Escorides has provided that when there is an opening in the goat for the veins being constricted it's cauterized; let him become pale with this; and do the cauterization as follows: take wool, soak it in old oil, and place it between his hands and his knees.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And take an opening in the dried goat and seal it with fire until charcoal is made; then let him rest on the wool until he stretches.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this process, and do not stop until the sensation of chewing reaches into the water and rests the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cauterization is called cow's cauterization.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On cauterization of pain in two.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains in the two are due to various causes, such as by impact or percussion or excess evacuation, and through causes similar to those, by infusion of moist and gritty matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And only cauterization is done in this single type which is performed through the release of grinding material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	So you see, proceed with the patient's evacuation using pills that are similar to them, which are made on each side where pain is three lines according to the width of him, since signs are taken from every line or more, depending on the tolerance and virtue of the patient.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And perform cauterization using punctual cauterization.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, apply three or four cauterizations with a medial spinal point according to this method:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the transition from cauterization to bile deficiency.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Causes observed for this disease in infants; and the sign of its onset in children is that it affects their body causing distortion, leading to elevation and change in movements.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And in the lower spinal area of the back and on his buttocks, which is already beginning to rise above the other spines.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you perform this and wish to prohibit it, then cauterize that point with a cautery according to this method:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	let the cautery cover all parts of the spine equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize on the spinal circuit with a point or two lines or three of the cautery.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be placed among them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then treat the area where it is healed with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May be cautious that a cautery not be administered in bile deficiency which is caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the treatment of gout and joint pain with cauterization.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold fluids that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And how is gout treated when it's caused by friction in a manner of treatment and not by simply relieving the pain, then you apply cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And what you do is to cauterize that area related to the joint's discharge in the arm region using point cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And for this type of cautery, which is called olive-shaped, here is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it's necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then you should apply a point cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains ascend into the thighs or to other joints, and you have these observations, then cauterize that area above each thigh with three or four cauterizations of all parts using this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if the point cautery is necessary for these types of cauterizations, then cauterize that area without pressing too much with your hand before, just around the size of the cord.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains ascend into both thighs, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the legs and it's called gout, then prick on the nerve circuit as it turns, prick those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then prick on the nerve circuit over each finger and at the pulse point of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains ascend for a few days to the elbows or muscles, then cauterize all parts of the helpers.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not eliminate the illness from proper diet and medicine reception; if it is done properly with steam, elimination will occur with this cautery, may God help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the treatment of ruptures with cauterization.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there's rupture in the intestines and speaking of hernias before the operation for the surgeon, when they start from that area, then it is ordered that the patient abstain from food on their day and use gentle causes so that the abdominal opening is healing.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then have the patient lie between your hands on their back, and command them to keep their head in place so that the wound is healed or the hernia appears after it.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that to your thumbs and test the rupture over the bones of the hip as you mark the extremity which is similar to half of a circle in the lower parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery with this form being its shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	And let it be moist and emit sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the hernia or the protruding part to its natural position, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from protruding again.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery over that mark with your hand and apply it directly, take that so when you touch their hips into the middle of the body; repeat at that other spot if in the first attempt you have not succeeded up to the bones.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely the movement of the hernia during your cauterization, do not burn that hernia for it should not cause death or any other great harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you have the cautery, do not touch the bones, do not confirm your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And be aware that the child's cautery should be delicate according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then treat the area of the cautery for three days with ointment until the scab from the wound heals.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for ten days until the area and the wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And make sure to regulate the nutrition according to the duration of the healing process which affects their abdomen, and ensure that the intestine does not protrude during the effort of recovery.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it comes to removing after approximately ten days, administer food properly, and keep him for another ten days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And if he is working hard and consuming food and drink, along with strong vows, then when using this entire regimen of treatment, he will become healthy.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will say about the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, starting from mealtime, and you should not delay. Then cauterize that rupture with a round pointed cautery according to his quantity, and let it be as drained by the chain thus like the tender part of him; and then treat that where we have said, and do not adjust it too much.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And already, some have said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this method, because it is handled like a test:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and draw a line that you make past the width at the lowest part slightly above the rupture, and another line on top; then place your hand on an oblique cautery, but the first cautery is softer and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	About cauterization of torsion.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When the pain persists in some limbs due to impact or percussion and does not respond to treatment with medicines for a long time, then you should proceed to cauterize with pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the size and shape of each limb dictate the type of cautery to use, considering its effectiveness and suitability for the patient. Also taking into account the location of the torsion and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; and otherwise, then proceed with more rounds of cautery on him. For customary cases like these pains are punctured on the body at the part closest to the patient, so you should use these types of cautery until the patient becomes healthy.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	About cauterization for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leprosy cases require cautery treatment for a long time, especially when it is caused by the decay of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you want to cauterize that (leprosy), consider whether it is contagious and treat it with the method we said in the division and don't do this way, nor that one, fearing for the patient's health. Then cauterize over the head using various cauteries: on the middle of the head, and on the second slightly to the side of him, shave his forehead up until the hair; and both above two corns; and another behind, on the back or neck;
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally place your hand with the cautery a little inside where he begins to exert in his mouth a small effort, and if his breaths are disordered, so that thick vapors can be expelled from him; and cauterize on the pimple according to what is needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread over the patient's body and is manifestly visible, then you should cauterize that using those cauteries which we said in the head; and apply a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on each cheekbones, and two on both shoulder blades, and five on the ribs, and one large on the hip bones near the buttocks, and one on the knee cap, and two on each elbow, and one on each elbow, and two on each knuckle, and one on each knuckle of his feet, and two on all joints mentioned including arms and legs, and on every single heel of his feet, and on the groins of his body.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And watch over the nerves which are above the foot, do not touch those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some treatments involve cauterization on the bone of the elbow and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the intestines.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more closely you fit the cautery, the more rejuvenating and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as they do with needles, since his body is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And remember that the cauteries should be large or small according to the limbs and joints, as dictated by the nature of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the cautery with ermine skin powder mixed with honey, and apply other treatments until he is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	About cauterization for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is paralyzed or asleep and is treated with medicines or bandages but does not heal, then you should cauterize the paralyzed limb using cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery penetrate only a little into the patient's skin.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some cases require cauterization for certain paralyses that affect the arms and legs, as well as the shoulder blades, you observe the nerves leading to that limb, and enhance the paralysis.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not diagnose this without knowledge of body anatomy and the movement nerves throughout the entire body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cautery treatment for boils that have burst.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When boils are old and do not respond to any of the medicines' ointments, then you apply a cautery on that place with a point for a little time according to the thickness of the boil's fluid within, until the whiteness and color of it is renewed and the color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with flour of ashes and lentils mixed with roasted oil and leaves of arnagrosa, or from the dung of a dove or from apricot leaves. From each take one part and mix them all together. And apply linseed to cover it until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the cautery treatment for carbuncles.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When ulcers start and you want to stop them, then apply a circular cautery around that area like it is revolving.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise ones say that you should apply the inner part of the cautery in the middle area; however, I do not see this, fearing it might be an ulceration, and I have seen this in a few occasions.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is the inner pus that should be treated with a circular cautery around it as we have said, or with a point cautery.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cautery treatment for abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When any abscess takes longer to mature, and this is due to excess or the age of the patient, who is old and weak, with little strength, or due to time, and you want to hasten its maturity; then apply a point cautery around that area; and then let it continue to mature.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to perform the puncturing of it with a cautery, then light the cautery in this shape: and place that in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the pus.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you apply the cautery in that place where there is pus, because it alleviates the arm's pain; and then treat it until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the cautery treatment for corroding (or eating away) conditions.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a spreading corruption in the limb, which eats away that area like a fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	So if you notice corrosion in the affected area that requires a cautery application, then light up the point cautery with small or large points as needed, according to where the corrosion is present.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then apply the cautery across all parts until you eliminate all of the corrosion and do not disturb any underlying cause.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let that area rest for three days, and place oil on the previously treated spots until all scabs are gone and all corruption has been eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat that with meat-producing ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If within three days you see that healthy meat has grown in the area without corruption, then it is good. But if not, then apply the cautery again over the corroded areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Corrosion can be treated with some doses of acute medicine, which is half in a place where cautery would be applied.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, the cautery using fire is for small pus that is young and fresh.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already mentioned the treatment with acute medicine in the section on division; therefore, take that when you have discernment about it from your patient.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cautery treatment for clogged (or stuck) conditions, and other similar issues.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Visible scars often appear in the parts of the patient's body where they are called 'claws', and this is a major cause, an entryway, which presses on the chest; applying cautery to those areas can be done in two ways: one is with fire-cautery, and the other is with hot water cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Applying fire cautery is by igniting the tool shaped like a small cup, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the claw of every part, and it has fine grooves.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then hold that ignition over the claw, and place your hand rotating on the cautery in the circuit of the claw until the cautery reaches to the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let that rest for three days until arm secretion begins.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then cover that with bandages soaked in saltwater and let the bandage rest on it for a night, until that corrosion is eliminated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with meat-producing ointment until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if they are non-convertible and visible scars occur on the surface of the body, especially in the back and feet, then you should perform cautery with hot water on those areas. Take a small cup made of ream, iron or wood, place that over the claw; heat some water in the cup slightly, hold your hand, rotate it as if stirring while pressing the edge of the cup against the root of the claw, allowing the hot water to reach the root of the claw via this stirring motion. Have the patient endure the hot water dripping for about an hour and then remove that, until the claw from its roots is eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus perform those here and near the other into which you come over all of what is in their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat those abscesses that are caused by the extraction of the claws, with remedies from which the flesh takes its creation.
Capitol .liiii.	Capitol. 53.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Regarding the treatment of tremors through cautery.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When one suffers from tremors due to rubbing of nerves or due to fever caused by rubbing, or for any other similar reason, then you should apply cautery four times or over each vertebra in the back; and at each vertebral area, place a single point of cautery; also on the feet of that person, and above the stomach, use an olive-shaped point of cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremors of that person subside, and one notices the improvement in their health condition caused by rubbing (of the affected area).
Capitol .lv.	Capitol. 55.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Regarding the treatment of injuries to the heart through cautery.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are ruptures in the body, and pus-filled cavities formed from corrupted fatty materials; then at the beginning of their appearance, have them treated by applying cautery over every opening of the fistula with a fine-tipped cautery under mirt wood, where its tip is extended into the flame; or with long roots of restorative herbs; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some burns are treated by applying cautery at the start of their expulsion following this method; they do not form ulcers and eliminate excess, doing so with those treatments, thereby healing them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is necessary that this be done near the discharge during bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol. 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Regarding the treatment of bleeding caused by a surgical incision through an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	When there is bleeding from an artery that needs to be cut, you should cut the wound where it is supposed to drain, or cut at the pus pocket or by applying cautery on the limb, and then similarly, making it difficult to stop that bleeding.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	And when such happens with others, you should hold your hand on the opening of the artery, and place your finger in that spot to strengthen those burned wounds inside where the bleeding stops after you do this, and does not stop.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place the olive-shaped small and large cauteries close together, using several of them, and blow over those where flames are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one small or large according to the location and injury where the artery has ruptured, over that vein blowing immediately after you have strengthened your action, and apply the cautery until it is stopped and restrained that blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery while you maintain your action and extinguish the cautery, then take another one from among the cauteries that are being prepared in the fire, and so do not stop doing this one after another until the bleeding is restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And remember to avoid burning the nerves that are here, so as not to bring about another mischief on the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrain the bleeding in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless one uses any of these four methods: or use the cautery as we have mentioned, or if extraction does occur but fails to do so, then when extraction happens, its ends are burned and the bleeding is restrained; or bind it with astringents or tighten it through strong bandaging, or let them rest on medicinal substances whose virtue is to restrict bleeding; and they should be bound with lint in proper restriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Let that person who administers proper restriction on them with astringents and tightening with cloths or in the position of burning causes and similar circumstances not be satisfied except with small ones.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If such happens with others and the doctor is not present or medicine cannot be applied, then open as we have indicated over the opening of that vein like what we have said, and understand for a large bandaging on them until the bleeding stops from most of the wound, and above the artery do not let this strengthen; and on top of the artery spread with water rubbed with a great coldness until the bleeding is cooled down and thickened; then consider in which needs to use cautery or necessary medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Regarding cutting, piercing, and punctures, as well as bloodletting and wounds, along with their various symptoms.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already discussed in the first chapter all illness where fire cautery is suitable and with burning medicine, and their occasions and causes, as well as the tools needed for these situations, and I have organized the chapters on the rising state of health within the body.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so as to relieve the one who requests it, on what has been requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, children, learn that in this chapter we are dealing with the continuation of what was discussed in the first chapter about cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And be aware that for this you must exercise great caution, since in the operation of this chapter, burns caused by bleeding need to be treated with a substance that affects veins or cutting on pus pockets, or puncturing discharge or purging of wounds, or removal of arrows or cutting of tumors and their various symptoms.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And from all of those come fear and trembling, and in their heart of hearts death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	I urge you to be aware that this does not happen upon you in the state where it resides, for sometimes certain observations force you to handle men differently from ways they are prone to illness.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of them will die from their illness and for its mildness you should consider death to be upon them, and similarly because of the intensity of what they find in their illness, and also due to the length of their illness, and fear is associated with it which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among those is the one who gives you his account and speaks, you hope for that health, and their illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not consent to what someone shows you about themselves in this manner; your caution should be greater than greediness and your appetite. Do not presume any cause upon it except for certain knowledge that verifies what you must know, and from which you can derive a plausible success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your illnesses with prediction and indication to which health is converted, for within that it provides you assistance regarding acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, God inspires your true understanding and does not withhold direction and protection from you, for that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have organized this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to the chapter of cauteries, for the care of the head in relation to the feet, so that you will be pleased with what you inquire about and the needful regarding this.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water which is contained in a child's head.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness, which is observed in children, belongs to childhood, and when the child grows stronger, its head becomes light.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes for reasons that are not apparent, there are some occurrences.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have only seen this illness in children; and for all those I saw they were doomed to die, and because of this it is an observed outcome in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child had a head filled with water, and their head was always so magnificated that it could not contain itself due to the size of their head, and more than the humidity increased within which there was death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture either is added between bone and flesh, or it is added to the bones from above the skin.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Where the operation in that case when moisture is between bone and flesh and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision in the middle place of the head along a crack in the thickness, and let the length of the crack fall two notches where the moisture flows, and this is the form of pus:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And thus if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then these are two cracks according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is above the bones, its sign is that you open the corners of the head from every side and when you squeeze that with your own hand inwards at those parts, water comes out, which is not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And thus you should make three cracks in the middle of the head according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And when you finish the incision, extract all the moisture; and then strengthen these cracks with bandages and wadding; and on the fifth day apply oil from above inside the cracks, and then cleanse the wound with lint and ointments, and strengthen the head with equalities; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another way for the incision that you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of water, where sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or at the front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore, pay attention to the incision where the abscess and the filling with water appear, and do this as best suits you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that do not cut the artery and let blood flows with health, letting the patient die due to that flow of blood instead of eliminating moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Second chapter.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the incision of arteries which are close to the ears, referred to as "hilasseysse".
Capitol segon.	Third chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there occur catarrhs or pains in the throat or stomach, and it is an old situation, and you do not rely on the treatment of medicines for this, then the principal cure here is the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And thus when you want to incise where the patient feels their head, rub the area with coarse cloth so that the arteries are visible, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the veins are; and mark the areas above those which are close to the ears, not necessarily in all people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then mark above the artery with lint, and then incise each one where the cracks of the sharp parts meet during incision entering into the bone, and let this be according to the thickness of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the needle near your pulse point and twist it to where it touches the parts below.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And make the length of the incision two inches, for when any vein is cut, the pulse becomes weakened and the fainting starts to occur. It jumps frequently due to this.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the artery does not appear in the groin, then measure from the elbow the length of three inches, and try to stab it, and then enter into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And whatever you want to obtain from the blood is an amount of blood itself. and take it strongly from the patient's arm or wrist, and all of this is according to the amount that appears from the condition of the patient and the fullness of the artery of the patient.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and if there remains over the bone any cause of abscess, then cut that out by itself to prevent an abscess from forming.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with bandages and with strips of cloth, and properly heal it with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When some things happen causing old migraine or sudden headaches, due to humidity in farming and the quality of water in the temples, or an old headache that resembles those, and is treated according to the methods of healing medicine, if you don't agree with this, then we have developed these illnesses: extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of them just as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of operation and extraction is that the patient raises their skin which is on the temples; understand where the artery is apparent in the temple area, as you can see it through its pulse, and it's hidden in few people due to the intensity of rubbing.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it's hidden, then strengthen the patient's arm with some cloth; and place a rough fabric or boil water in that area until you see the artery clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the needle of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you pierce the cord in that with ease until you reach the artery; and take it out with oil on your hand and extract that from the superficial parts; while extracting that from the cord, discover those of the tunics which are around it, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, then wrap that at the tip of the thumb, and cut off a part from it according to the amount by which its ends are lengthened and shortened; and do not allow any bleeding, for if they are not cut, the pulse will not rise.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then drain out some blood. In three parts.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then cover that in two places with twice as strong threads or with bands tightly, and do not cut it before the wound heals to prevent any bleeding.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut off the excess that is between two strips; and do this either at that moment or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery inside the bone and through the surgical knife until its ends are cut off, and remain in place of that half-done work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it's better if the patient has fever or is of a cold constitution; as cauterization helps in reducing the final stages of dampness, therefore it's better for youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And consider the extraction of arteries that you place at the same location as before, and be sure to let them rest on the patient's dry dust properly, and then treat them with dry medicines so that they bleed out and heal with heat until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working on another area, bleeding starts from the artery, then you restrain that bleeding either by bandaging or with a cautery, or fill in that spot, and hold your hand until that bleeding is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any of those causes are not present to you at the site, then pause your hand on the spot until the bleeding stops, and cover the area with cold water until its heat subsides, and strengthen it according to what is needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And the most important thing in extracting an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two needles, because you have stabbed both areas from one point, and pause the ignition until they reach the bone and cut the vein at two points, so that it stretches what is between its ends, which are not completely hardened by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is how the cautery should be used:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the heat of both needles be equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the heat of both needles is greater than that of two needles, it's better, as they will come close to every skin without causing damage and won't burn the flesh at speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is some thickness in those, heat from the fire is kept in those and the flesh is removed very gently.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this method is better for all works and even for smaller ones.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the spaces between the two needles should be equal to the thickness of your finger.
Capitol quart.	The head quarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	From the treatment of wounds caused by sharp and acidic tears in the stomach.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When they are acidic, and it is the wound of those veins which are above the head towards the front, and there is no reason to apply any remedy in this case through medicine, and sometimes the patient's face reddens and feels a walk on their forehead as if it were a procession of ants, the breaths of them being exhausted, moistened that they already have known, and their eyelids are scratched by the sharpness of the tears, the old people apply themselves to this treatment with endurance during this operation, and many consider this treatment as passing.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And this is what you order the patient to scrape the skin which is on their forehead, and then you proceed to cut three equal gaps in the forehead according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the cut is two inches: one gap should be equally distant from the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to an inch or so of the movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And take care of the beginning of the veins which are on two sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between any incision is adjusted to three inches in quantity.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth, apply them to the ones where the sweat dries.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And insert the point of two sharp ends, this is the form of the incision for them:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which goes from the beginning of the heat inside to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excoriate all that chain which is between two incisions at the cheek, which is above the bone, and make this from the incision to move inside to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then scrape that point and enter in the first incision another blade of a different instrument which is called a surgical knife, sharp from one side and not from the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Place the sharp side of this knife on the attached flesh of you need to cut the chain, and on that side inside the bone, and place the other side within the jawbone, then insert that thing in between the gap that goes towards the gap opening, and remove all veins that descend from the head to the mouth.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May it be continuous with this appearance of the chain, and proceed like that in the gap towards the other gap.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when there is a quantity of sweat flowing out, squeeze the places of the clotted sweat areas.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And proceed by stopping in each gap with a small cloth, and place on those ashes that are burned in vinegar and oil and vinegar mixture, and leave so it doesn't cause pus.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day untie the bandage and administer large quantities of hot water or tea, and proceed to treat this with balm ointment in oil among others until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	The conclusion. V is likely an error or a typo and should be translated as "The end" or "Conclusion."
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	From the treatment of tears by catharsis and for those breaths that descend from the divisions inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When in one vein you remove the material and continue doing so, and sometimes the patient's breaths are exhausted, and already their observation is debilitated, and their eyelids are ulcerated, and from their forehead comes sharp toothache with subsequent extreme exhaustion, then you should be aware of these incidents that the materials and catarrh do not come only from the veins of the divisions inside but proceed from them.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment in those cases is this: you order the patient to rub their forehead, and then proceed to cut a gap at the center of the forehead, about an inch wide (and start from the gap on the left temple towards the right temple; and let the incision go inside the bone; and extend your hand along the muscles where they are thick due to chewing), so that the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Sweat all the moisture either with cloth or with dry cloths, and then fill between the two lips of the gap with a small cloth or with pieces of fabric.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And proceed by placing on it ashes that have been burned in vinegar and oil, so as not to cause pus.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove this and see that the pus has diminished, then understand that he should rub inside the bone starting from his neck flesh, and proceed to treat this with desiccative regimens that make regenerate the flesh as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of honeycombs mix them together, and prepare a poultice from them which is applied to these wounds as if they were born in flesh.
Capitol .vi.	The conclusion. VI indicates that this might be the sixth part or section of a larger treatise or text, suggesting there may be further information following this point.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	From the treatment of what affects the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that affect the ears are one of four types: it could be mineral gravel or something similar to gravel like iron and mercury, or it could be plant-based like clove or fava beans, or it could be a flow-causing substance like water or vinegar and things similar to them, or some kind of animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when gravel is found in the ear or other similar cause of those causes that do not settle or grow in the ear, suspend the ear to the sun. And if you find gravel, then distill some oil that has been violated or sulfur on it, and proceed with its extraction, make someone sneeze while you are observing their noses for the occurrence of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place in the circuit of the earlobe several pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the earlobe to the parts above it, where swollen knots are heated by these remedies against such causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not heated, then administer extraction to him with the instrument called epigastric massage forceps, which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it has been heated by massage, well done; and otherwise, then administer the extraction to him with a small incision from a lancet.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not heated by this, then make a thread and insert the end of the thread into the hole of the earlobe and seal around the edge of the thread with beeswax and oil to soothe it, so that it does not open except for the thread.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with strong suction from your mouth, as you have seen in this manner that we have described.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not heated in this manner, then take some powdered chalk or powder from ash onto which you put a small amount of water, and place that over the edge of the earlobe, and then cover that with a decently large piece of cloth placed around it.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the hole of the earlobe with ease, and then remove the moisture from the earlobe.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not heated by all the causes that we have described, then you must cut out that part which will become a boil or cramp.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting that is as follows: at the beginning, you grasp the site of the vein's origin and remove from the cut according to the manner of its virtue, then make a small incision between your hands and convert the earlobe to the parts above it, then create a tiny fissure in the edge of the earlobe through which you guide the grease towards the spot that is pressed by it.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the fissure is of lunar figure until it reaches the bone, and when the bone is hardened, stop that if you can with appropriate instruments; and then as fast as possible close that hole at once, and heal that within so that it gets well.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause found in the earlobe is one of those fats that grow and swell up, then administer treatment and extraction to it; but if you don't feel confident, then take a fine needle according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And proceed with the removal of that fat which is found in the earlobe.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it has been moistened by the vapor of the earlobe, place it on swollen knots, and then extract from them either through holes or through a fine instrument as described, which facilitates the extraction of it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	And in the water which enters into the earlobe cavity, make your nose use sneezing at the beginning, and fill his earlobe with a small piece of old cloth, and put this water on that part of the earlobe. If it is heated by this, well done; otherwise, then take small pebbles and stones according to its length, heat them in the fire for a little while, and let the patient insert one of these into his mouth and hold onto one end with their hand while they strike another stone against the stone which is inside the earlobe.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Then don't stop at this stone until all the water has heated up.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And as soon as the water is heated by this, take paper or wood instead. And place one end of it in the earlobe and extend the other end into the fire until its tip is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put in another piece of wood and do this many times until all the water is heated, and extract that with a similar method as described of the extracting rod.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	And in the extraction of an animal entering that earlobe, if it is small consider it larger and like him, treat it as we said in division; but if it's a large creature causing pain inside the body, then administer its removal with a tool and stones, and the reason for this is more minor than all other causes found in the earlobe.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	And in the removal of worms bred in the earlobe, when you treat it as we said in division and in the distillation text, do not let your treatment go wrong. Then understand that you should place the earlobe under the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if worms appear here, then remove that with a tool or from a fine tube, but if no cause appears, then take a small pipe and extend it upwards widely, which is the form of this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the small end into the earlobe according to the quantity that your hand can endure; and suck it forcefully through suction, and do this many times, until all the worms are heated.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you don't feel confident, then place and seal around the edge of the tube with beeswax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already evaporated the old ones in worm treatment, find this in the distillation text.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if your discharge is such that you pour oils containing medicines into the earlobe with this tool, which has this form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that one out of silver or horn, leave it straight, in which there is a small hole, and place something on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore let them be so as to enable what is in the cavity of the urinary bladder here where it might be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rod and envelop it at the end of his descent with grease, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or the juice from some herb, or whatever you choose from these medicines in the urinary bladder -- which is located in the ear -- , and insert the rod with the grease upwards and squeeze with your hand until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil internally.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And whatever is inserted in the ear should already be heated by fire to a small extent.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that which you distil in the ear is not too hot, for the medicines of the ear do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear wax blockage.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children have small perforations in their parents' abdomens that do not go through. Sometimes this happens in some adults as well; ear wax obstruction inside the meat of the ear due to a lump or soft flesh; and sometimes this ear wax obstruction is done at the opening of the ear canal which does not reach the bottom, and sometimes it's outside the parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And the one that happens at the opening, which doesn't reach the bottom, is in the more difficult-to-treat situations.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that case where you can reach the bottom, simply take the ear of the patient to the sunlight and watch it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there is an obvious obstruction, open that with a delicate tool like this which forms:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end where it's small in width, has one part sharp and the other not; and the tool should be of two lengths on its own, so that it doesn't hurt the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the obstruction is due to soft flesh within the ear or in its meat, then you use that one with fine needles and pierce it vigorously inside until all the flesh is exposed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the obstruction is at the opening of the ear, then take a thin rod and heat it slightly with fire, and then place that in the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you have felt obstruction with what the patient feels with ease, due to ear pain, relieve the pressure on him easily; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place an ear dressing on the ear according to the size of the hole in which you have wrapped it in Egyptian oil; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or take something else and insert that into water, grind it into a paste and apply it; and if the ear is already swollen, then carefully remove whatever that was and replace it with another substance which you cover in wadding soaked in ointed oil, while ensuring that the abscess drains; and treat that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If pus comes out, then immerse a sponge or cloth in hot water and place it over the ear, and apply another treatment which constricts the flow of pus, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of eyelid swelling that occurs around the eyes.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	The eyelids (athezil) that swell around the eyes in some cases are wet, and in other cases are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then take those with tweezers or one by one, and divide each with a delicate tool along its length, and then place them on the affected areas into a paste.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is pain with pus coming out, then you cauterize those with a small point cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to closely follow the incisions and make few small cuts, which allows the previously swollen areas to return when some cause remains among those cuts; and when they are cauterized with fire, those cuts get burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for large swellings that occur on the eyelids of humans.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Swelling around the eyelids of humans that occurs due to some cause which accumulates into large size in its strength and hardness; because of this large size it is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	It's an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid, both inside and outside.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	So, in their operation here is what you should consider if the swelling is originating from within the eyelid and is swollen throughout; and the cause of it is minor.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make a cut across it for its width, and then carefully drain it from all sides until you release the fluid, and then hang it with one end and discard that.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you have not yet recognized the start of the illness then slowly penetrate into the eyelid starting from any small point, so it is not noticeable in any case.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure (or area) is large, then adjust it with suture; and care for that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it's small, you won't suffer ill effects from that where his pain restores that and makes flesh.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the biggest one is declining towards the parts inside the eyelid you should remove the surface inside, then correct that and suspend the biggest one with an incision, another from which you start, press it from all sides. If the eyelid itself is elongated by this incision, it will not be noticeable in any case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then at the incision, wash the wound with salty water; and care for the area until it heals.
Capitol .x.	The sentence "Capitole x." seems to be in a language that combines elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French-like syntax, but its exact translation might require more context or specific knowledge about medieval medical terminology and dialects.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	The sentence "De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel" seems to be a line from the text that describes medical practices, likely focusing on eye or eyelid treatment.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is caused by something that's created in the layers of the eyelid, especially more so with infants. This aggravates their illnesses and affects their vision; they can't look at the brightness of sunlight because their tears get stuck to them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And you should touch those several times on their faces constantly, and they sleep with the same. Their eyelids are wet over their brows, which have already been covered in puffiness, and there's an anticipation of conjunctival inflammation in their eyes; and when you press the area where your fingers are, you can feel swelling inside those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is another way for surgery in which the sick person puts their head on your side and then you place a cloth over them and make an incision. You create a circle according to the quantity of pus found throughout that part, and then you put that above that and press with your fingers all around so that inflammation would be added inside this circle, and in the middle of that moisture you cut diagonally across the fissure by its width, and the fissure shouldn't be larger than the one made during a tubal ligation.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the preparation phase, you should cut through the membrane completely until you reach pus, which occurs after white fatty pus begins to process in all the major positions via a wound according to the shape of white fat.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract those with cloths which you have enveloped between your fingers at the protruding parts and mix them around with your right and left hands until they are dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And remember not to adjust within the wound itself directly because there might be pus that hasn't surfaced and you should avoid removing it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If there is no pus in the beginning of the cut, then you should adjust inside the cut with a small tool so that pus can develop; and subsequently remove it as we have mentioned. And also submerge cloths from him in water, vinegar and add oil, then place them on the area and strengthen those with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And in such a manner they spread salt and place it in the cavity of the cut because what remains from that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then take care of it until it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If you happen upon pus in the area, then treat it with plaster bandages until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	The text "Capitole xi." appears to be part of a larger work possibly related to medieval medical practices or another discipline using Latin-based terminology with some unique linguistic features.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	The sentence "De manieyras de tactimi del huel" seems to be in a language that combines elements of Latin and Old French, perhaps with influences from Italian or Spanish as well.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When there are natural red bumps on the eyes, and it's an old one, then those cause discomfort to the eye leading to methods of ocular illnesses like excessive tears and swelling of eyelids and tissue that causes damage to the eye itself, which is called blinding of the eye. The cure happens in four ways: or through cauterization with fire; or using acute medicine as was mentioned in the chapter on cauterization; or by performing excision followed by suturing; or with needles according to what I'm saying.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And indeed cover that you place the tip of the patient's head on your seat; then convert the eyelid of the old man to your left hand, and if it is converted, yes it is; and if not, insert a needle into the one where there is firmness in the beginning pus before leaving the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through at that place above, and this must be - near the edge of the eyelid from which hairs are born - near the hairs, and pull out the needle to its ends on top of the eyelid, and convert it to a ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And indeed proceed within the junction of the eyelid leaving the hairs adjusted to the surface of the incident tear duct in the major lacrimal into the lacrimal gland; and indeed extract the needle and pause with the eyelid powder of sand or dust, and proceed over the eyelid by tracing a line, and this should be like the figure of a mint leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Indeed, it is customary that the figure depends on the amount of deflation in the eyelid, which has already diversified among humans, and among those are the indigenous who cause a large amount inside the lid according to the extent by which the lid becomes swollen.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And indeed proceed along the surface of the two lines that you traced, starting from the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision near the natural hairs such as that of a king's thickness.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And indeed place the needle in one of the two corners of the chain, and indeed scrape that completely, then adjust according to your cut the two lips at the mouth or with a fine wool thread, clean it off, and make them stick what is superfluous from the threads between two eyebrows due to certain causes that may happen. If you wish to do this way, otherwise do not care.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And indeed let the thread of the stitches rest inside for three or four days, and take care of this.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, let the wound and its stitches rest, then take care of this by letting it dry out and shrink, which when the eyelid is swollen you must seal the wound and add to it; indeed do so as the ancients taught.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	Indeed, with him there is concern about the patient, and it's a good operation, and not out of his fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way to consider it, and that's when you draw the shape of the leaf of mint on the eyelid, then indeed raise the eyelid with three nails separated and grouped according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Indeed, if it's not possible this way, use the nails instead, and that isn't equal, then take a needle with thread and place that in the middle of the figure, and insert another needle close to the major lacrimal gland, and another needle according to the minor lacrimal gland, and adjust between your fingers the needles to be equal, and indeed raise your hand to an elevation equal to that, lift the whole chain on which it's attached as we have recounted.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And indeed adjust both lips of the wound with stitches, and care for that area until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	Indeed, if an abscess occurs, you should continue with your operation or incision, but treat that abscess with bandages and resemble it, and apply with ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And indeed there are some inflammations under the eyelid that their hairs should be converted, then remember to use in that what we have mentioned about operations; indeed stitches are more artificial in others.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Indeed, for surgeons, it's according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And indeed, you should convert the eyelid and divide the figure which is inside according to what I have recounted; then make two canes or two fine needles whose length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and the width of them is similar to the width of the surface.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And indeed you have incised at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And indeed add to the underside of what is superfluous from the eyelid of the old man, and tighten the threads of each part tightly, then let that rest for a few days, as the chain due to tightness will die and be rejected and it will decompose as it passes out naturally.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	Indeed, if it's delayed, then break the stitches at the corners, and indeed care for the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then when it's hardened, the eyelid will be lifted without hurting the hairs.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way you should make two canes as follows:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And it should have the length and width of neither too much nor too little.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Concerning lifting the painful hairs on the backside when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are unnatural hairs that are hard and prickly causing pain, the operation is to take a fine needle and place it on this fine thread of linen, then adjust its extremities in a very subtle manner without touching any part.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the needles is as long as your palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And indeed you can prepare another fine needle from that, and pinch its extremities if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And indeed place the patient's head on your seat, and is near to the sun so that your work may be recognized, as it is a subtle and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the place where hair grows appropriately, making it penetrate the eyelid carefully while you remove it from the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair inside and insert that into the follicle, and use one or two or three hairs but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand into that place where the hair has been pulled out to the follicle in the eyelid on the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is pulled out to the follicle and not removed from the skin, pull out the follicle in the eyelid on the skin. From that place, where the follicle was pulled out under the eye, you can proceed.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And pull it out towards the field of vision, whereupon you will pull out the follicle and that skin, and dig into every inch and clean the field, and leave the cuts for two or three days, within which the hair adheres to its place and grows back healthy flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is too short, then adjust a long hair among the natural hairs, and elevate it towards that, or leave it in such a way that it grows about to fill some space, and then you elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	Title XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of eyelash removal, which occurs on the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it occurs in the field of vision to remove an eyelash, and when the eyelid contracts against its edge, either on the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of scar tissue or cut edges or burn marks, it is called porcupine-like. This eyelash removal is either natural or accidental, caused by the consolidation of scars or cuts or burns, or by resemblance to their maladies.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation for this is that you will cut through that consolidation and separate those tissues from it. You place a piece of linen cloth in between them where there was once a gap, and tie them together until they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not forget to use your patient's treatment for the causes that dry out and constrict. If you do this, it will return to eyelash removal worse than nothing at all if left untreated over time.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use remedies for those causes that moisten and soothe as fenugreek does, soaking it in water to which you add a bit of the cloth, or use camphorated ointment, which becomes liquid when mixed with some oil. Immerse the cloth in this solution and then apply it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you puncture everything that is not yet consolidated according to the shape when it began.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have described is nothing more than a correction of eyelash removal, which does not return the shape of the area as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Title XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment for eyelash removal which is performed on the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This eyelash removal which is done on the eyelid below, known as vertical eyelash removal; it can be either a natural phenomenon or an accident.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	An accidental eyelash removal is caused by scars, cuts, burns, or other similar conditions.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of the operation for this is that you should take a needle with two threads attached to it, place the needle in the skin, and then make it pass through the left lacrimal (tear duct) into the right lacrimal, ensuring that the thread reaches both ends of the skin.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the skin upwards from above towards the needle and hold it with the needle itself, and incise on a wide spot.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then, if the shape of the eyelid returns as expected, it is good; otherwise, take the thread and hold it in the cut area, and with this convert the eyelid, making the two cuts on the lower part of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two cuts be at the two corners of the incision you have made between them, and form an angle with each other when they come together, making their figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is the Greek letter: the lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then cut that skin by the amount that corresponds to the width of your lower eye, so as to flatten the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and stitch those with the thread of wool; and then treat those using the medicines that moisten and heal, applying them in such a way that they heal.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if eyelash removal occurs due to a cut, stitch or burn, then you should make an incision over the hair on the eyelid according to what has been done beforehand.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the paste between two layers as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the overall treatment discussion of eyelash removal which is either above or below, it runs through your operation according to how it is prepared in terms of the shape of eyelash removal, and that comes in various shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And all artisans are wise to prepare something in every manner that is possible for it within them to return the shape to its natural form, or close to that, and this patient according to what suits their operation and the tools in their most suitable arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Title XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many people, it is necessary that the eyelid adheres to more of the white of the eye above and restricts its natural movements and functions. Therefore, you should insert the end of your thread through the lower eyelid and elevate it there, or extend it up to the upper corner.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you insert the needle through a fine incision, which is not at the sharpness of the cuts, having blunt and small so that the patient does not get upset by the operation, and keep the incision that does not diminish the heat at its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And make your incision so as to remove that adhesion in a way that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then, put the heat in salty water where you will wash it; or distill from junia dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the heat with a soft cloth, place on the heat wool soaked in hen's egg white, and after use remedies for consolidation until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol Chapter XVI
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Chapter 16: On incisions of the nails and prominence of flesh in tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that a nail can be in two ways, one being nerve-related, and it resembles a hard, thin ciphac; or not nerve-related, resembling white damp that has condensed. The latter, when you touch it, makes the nail take on a single point, it is detached and the nail does not stick to it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin until within the major tear duct, where they gradually expand covering the view and prevent light and heat motion.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way to act in the incision is that the patient holds their head where you are, and then open their nostrils, lift the eyelid with your hand, and after carefully cut the nail from a small pebble duplication, extend it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a pin and insert it into that with a horse hair or cowhide, or from the same, or a strong dog, or gradually extend the tip of the pin and place that in the middle of the nail, then penetrate that with the needle, and fix to the nail; and extend that to the parts above, scrape off the skin at the edge of the nail which severs the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And follow that into the hair inside the tail end of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then insert the remaining part into the tear duct in a fine incision or with small slits, and makes the flesh of the tear duct naturally, such that through this incision there does not develop continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some times the nail at the sun's edge is extended or on the heel, as we have said, and then it should be scraped out through this opening which has this shape:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And remember that in the incision do not touch the corneal epithelium and let it result in rupture, and that the pupil be pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And the incision gets in the nostril a little salt water or made from vinegar, let that one inside for another day; and after that heal it with water that covers until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nerve-related and you cannot insert the needle, or it does not stick to that part of the nail, then these remedies for the nail are treated with medicines, and they are healed in this way as I have mentioned and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to detach that, then open the nostril of the patient and take out a fine incision along with the sharpness according to this shape:
am subtilitat.	in subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you notice that it is becoming rarefied and mixed with the tear duct, then distill from your mouth in the nostril made from vinegar or from apple cider or from salt water, and pour the nostril inside for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then perform the operation on that until everything from it is removed, otherwise if the contrary pus ball is in the nostril, then you leave that one, and after healing the pus ball until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And continue with your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the tear flesh, if you notice by great harm in the nostril, should be suspended from a nail; and cut that one part after another, and do not finish the incision for fear of causing continuous tears to flow.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill on the tear duct with apple cider vinegar and make it from vinegar until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol Chapter XVII
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Chapter 17: On incisions of the alveolar and what is born from adjusted flesh in the nostril.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some in the nostrils of some people an odd flesh grows, and it is overgrown so that it covers the pupil, or approaches or strengthens near the eyelids, and squeezes the eyelids to the parts beyond and is assembled touching the back wall.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation on you is that the patient holds their head where you are; and then open all the nostrils of that one and collect all that flesh with suitable tools for water, or use forceps or spoons; and after that cut the flesh starting there until everything is finished through the incisors, and remember not to remove that part of it should be your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And make your incision with which you cut those ones or through the gap that we have recommended in the incisions of the nails, or with small slits along which the snail collects as it comes to resemble this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	When your operation is completed and the entire flesh has been refreshed, then fill the nostril with salt, or distill it into a powdered rue, resembling the powder of corrosive medicines, and place it above the nostril with a slice of raw hen's egg to ensure the protection against pus in case there's an abscess.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause of garlic burns the mouth and causes burning in the stomach, then place the nostril on the burn site with water until that burn subsides, and apply it continuously during this operation so that it is cured, similarly treat the adjusted flesh where an event occurs in the nostril of this spice.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But may you know that all healing of the nostril takes place naturally or accidentally through iron, and do not put your hand into these operations when that member is suffering this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of garlic in the nostril.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Garlic has rosy veins that are stubborn in the nostril and prevent its operation, and heal the nostril over a period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the nostril with garlic is strong and in it there is no other ailment than garlic, then you remove that garlic.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place their head in your direction, and suspend those veins with an onion or two according to your discretion; and let that onion be of fine double duplication as follows:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or if it's two onions gradually in one body as shown below:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And when those veins are removed with fine subtleties and subtlety, remove the smell immediately afterwards, while you observe those veins being refreshed by the garlic and turned over.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And remember not to let the garlic reach the ends of the nose; and if your operation is in midmorning facing the sun, ensure your operation movement that you only involve those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then distill in the nostril with green pepper or rue so that its sharpness corrodes whatever is refreshed from the garlic.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it's not possible for you to remove everything at that time, then cover everything with what relieves your pain, and leave him for a few days until the pain in him subsides and ensure protection against pus.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And apply it continuously to you according to your mother's method so that you are cured.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On reducing swelling in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat swellings with a cautery or with an acute burning medicine as described before and it is not cured, then there is no need for you in it, but you must open the pus sac to accelerate its maturation, and drain all the moisture that is inside it, let alone pouring until the bone becomes exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is exposed and there's a corruption or blackness, then you apply to him with a stick of this form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named with a sharp tip, and made of iron inside, let the head be red just like that which is made pierced by the hole of an axe or finely drilled (just like in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that above the corrupted part of the bone, and apply rotate it between your fingers, and gently press your hand gradually until you know that this corruption has been removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And do it with some repetitions, and apply restore the area from drying and coagulative causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	And if the area is hardened and in him there's a good flesh and it has been removed from the disease and garlic for forty days, and it is not renewed and there's no pus in him, then you know that he is cured.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it's not in him but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: you uncover from below with iron or with an acute medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then take hold following this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the end of your iron be triangular, and let the shaft of it be primarily extended into the end just as shown here.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place that above the bone, let it be close to the lacrimal; and extend your hand slightly in the nostril, and apply rotate your hand along the hold until all the bone penetrates, and let him feel the patient through his touch as he finds an exit when you use his hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	And then restore the area with coagulative drying medicines, just like these ones are prescribed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	And when you observe that the flesh and the area are hardened, then the substance which was discharged to the parts goes back to the nose, so this is slight pus on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On reducing the prominence of the nostril.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the nostril protrudes to its entirety and there's no pain or diminution during operation, then you have to guide the patient, and apply you make them breathe in through their neck on the scarification place and let it bleed well; and then apply rest by placing liquid liniment made from aloe and sesame oil and yolk of egg over the nostril with powdered plaster.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of the powders is that you take linen cloths, and each cloth be duplicated into four parts; and make from those pieces.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And place those one on top of the other according to the amount that the patient needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And apply firm pressure on those covered by the linen cloth until stiffness appears; and repeat the suction cups over wetness during scarification; and keep the suction cups in place and allow the body to stretch day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If meanwhile the ligament is softened, then it should be stretched.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And continue to hold the ligament straight day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the body has already been reduced, that is good, and if not, then continue with applying plaster over the powders and the stiffness, as well as suction cups until recovery occurs.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Regarding the onset of the prominence of the uveal layer.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the uveal layer, and subsequently it becomes prominent like a slight swelling of the eyelids, resembling a mild inflammation. The shape of the eye is distorted due to this, and if this situation occurs, then the procedure to be followed as we have advised you will be such: You should insert your instrument into the cleft of the uvea at the place left after removing it from above, and then insert another part of your tool near which has a double thread coming out of the lacrimal part. Make that thread penetrate and guide the first needle according to its position; then cut open the area of the double line and lift the portion of the uvea along with it in the groove of the instrument, and press that firmly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And after removing the needle, place on the eye wool soaked in egg white and let it sit until the thread falls into the uvea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And afterwards treat the eye with what will make that comfortable once the infection is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some inflamed areas accumulate around the entire circumference of the eye within the eyelid, increasing its prominence greatly. Then puncture it with a fine needle that reaches into the root of the eye, and allow the aqueous humor to drain out, and then return the eye down slightly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And after that, strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	Regarding the treatment of conjunctivitis.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease called conjunctivitis is nothing but inflammation that settles in the eye resembling water flowing out, and it's not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to have the patient sit on the prepared seat straightly and take hold of his head with your hands from both sides, moving him so that you can see where the inflammation reaches the parts left, then dry it without letting it go down and keep looking at the eye as you see.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it doesn't descend downwards, know that it's water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the descent of the inflammation isn't prepared as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a fine needle to pierce it over the eyelid, cutting off just a small part of the conjunctiva on the uveal membrane inside the corona (in that place you look), letting the inflammation be exposed.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	And once it's exposed, then you distill water from the eye into which you have mixed honey or water in which you already boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards treat the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Regarding the treatment of water flowing out from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already discussed the properties of water in its division and which one suits to pierce according to the description we declared, then that one according to the health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	And you should have the patient sit between your hands on a mat and hold his head in place firmly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your right hand near the inner eyelid of his eye, if the eye with water is the left eye; or with your right hand, if the eye is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And with your right hand take up an almond, if the eye is on the left side; or with your left hand, if the eye is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the almond near the cornea through the fullness of the eye along the membrane of the inner tear duct, and then scrape the almond with its edge and turn your hand towards that.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the membrane of the eye and feel when the almond has been drained due to visibility.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And you should have the length of the almond's path to the root as being the same measure as the space between the pupil and the end of the blackness, which is the rim of the eye; there you will see the pupil in your view of the eye through the transparency of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the almond in the area where there is water, and pull it down slightly once or twice. And if the water descends right away, then observe the patient so that you see his vision through the almond in his eye immediately, and leave the almond on his eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a little while; if the water has descended, then you should wait for that slight moment before removing the almond so it doesn't get stuck.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it's thus and doesn't descend, then you extract the almond gently, turning your hand little by little, and dissolve a small piece of clear gemstone salt in water; and with that wash inside the eye. Then leave the eye covered or stop with wool soaked in rubbed oil and egg white, and let the eye rest.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Those of our time customarily place above that which has been torn in the book of ointment.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not resist the urge to push through the wound in the skin due to its hardness - which is true for some of those whose skin becomes hard from pus - then find and use the instrument called an awl, which has this shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore pierce that joint, and do not finish your hand at the tendon, and do not let it if it does not make way for the finger in a delicate spot.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then insert the finger as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should complete your work well, have the sick person prepared to sleep decently in a room where they can lie on their back in darkness, and forbid all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place yourself in the nature of the sick person so that their nature is linearized, and do not let their head turn to either the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let him lie according to his disposition within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then release them in that dark bed and unclog the swollen view, and show him some remedies, and soon return his body within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And don't let you do this during the hour of treatments or shortly after infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	You must avoid doing this because the water could overflow slightly due to its great and strong pressure.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If an abscess appears in the wound, then you should release the pus before the seventh day, and correct that where there is pus formation.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you must observe the person's view and pause over their facial expression for their breath regulation through their nostrils for a few days, existing in the dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then let them get used to this dark room gradually and converse about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that within an almond, the disciple cannot see many defects, and thus you should be fervent about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And already has been reached by us from some of those who are in the Artach, and someone says to make fire in an Ayrac pot that is pierced through which water seeps.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen this perfectly in our land which has such water, nor is it legal in some of the books of the ancients; and this may be a new thing.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of pots by which one is placed over those where that person does not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they should be made of iron or proper copper, and let the ends of them at this subtlety triangular, the sharp end also like that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On treating flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are various buried flesh lumps of which one cause is such that it assembles to a pus-filled spot or a land mass, and this sickness is called a polyp which resembles that land mass.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if the flesh of him/her is crooked, pitted, dark-colored; and there's the case where the flesh appears to be lion-like but not with a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is among these lion-like flesh lumps that are not fraudulent or crooked, you should have the sick person stand between your hands and expose them to sunlight, and open their nostrils, and touch them with your tongue on those flesh lumps.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then remove that from the far parts, and carefully cut out what you have understood from those with a sharp, subtle tool between one part so you know all the flesh has been exposed; if there is any significant cause within them for which excision is possible, then use one of these finer instruments to facilitate this removal as it would not harm any significant cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If there is itching or if an abscess appears in the wound, then you should pause on this that concerns; or it's about malignant abscesses, then you squeeze and cauterize that place where the disease has spread and all cavities are exposed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then let it heal in the nose near the incision site with water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is opened and there's moisture inside the palate from this process, then you should know that it has been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate as you expect, then you should know that inside him/her is flesh without pus under your nose bones which have not been subjected to excision.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore you should insert faith into him/her where there is any lump, and drain the pus with the help of water, pause between each nut between one ounce or measure, and let the sick person stand and insert an end of the faith in their nose towards the ray or another cause which could be within them.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this is done, let him/her exhale its smell so it reaches the canals of their nose, and stand over his/her nostril area, which causes many defects in making these actions seem like what children do in schools, it's a slight reason to do that.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two ends of the faith, one end that extends over the nose and the other which exits in the nose, and then manage flesh stitches on the nostrils that are within the faith, and do this knowing that the flesh is already around the nostrils of the faith.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the gall bladder, place in the nose near the extraction point of the tongue a spoon, and do this for three days or more until the ointment has dissolved all that is rotten in the meats.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until healing occurs.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If there is a cure that dries out, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the apparatus for head-venting which consists of distilling oils and medicines in the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this of silver or copper, which looks like a small open lamp, as small as a little basin, and the mouth similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tube of this instrument for head-venting is flat, open; there should be a handle at its back end, to which you place it when you heat up oil or whatever you want from liquids and fluids.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this head-venting is priced: mix of castor oil, white balm, ginger, and saffron, long pepper, turmeric, cinnamon. Mix with flour and honey, then make them into pills. Take one pill and let it be chewed in water, then apply it to the patient's nostrils facing upwards.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About the nostril tips.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Reductions are made that the nostril tip exists in the extremities of the nose, and it becomes enlarged and inflamed for a few days during which its healing process is observed.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And so conduct that you introduce it at the beginning of the appearance of it, and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place on the spot or with a cautery or burning medicine where there is a lesion.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If its introduction is delayed and it becomes enlarged, then consider if it has hardened, is firm, dark in color and lacks sensation; then do not touch this with iron which is pus. The reductions that lead to this pus indicate that the lesion it introduces causes a great malady over that on which it was situated.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the pus is leon in texture and not dark in color, and there are chances for introduction throughout this area, then evacuate the patient and introduce this sign with fear, and treat the lesion with things that dry out and restrict until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	About the suture of the nose, lips and earlobe when continuity is dissolved by disease or resemblance.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that whenever you encounter the dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, there is little to gain from that operation unless it's for certain individuals.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And so proceed, when you approach any cause of those, consider if it's disease fresh on the tongue, then adjust the two lips of the disease with suture and treat it until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of continuity dissolution are already separated, and any part is healthy, then proceed that you remove every part of its apparent origin until no disease escapes.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen them, spread the tongue of a dragon's disease on them and mix it finely, place over that some dust of diafinicon or another of the consolidating plasters for three days or four, then remove that and replace that plaster until those gall bladders are removed by themselves, then treat with ointment until it heals.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method for the suture is that you add the dissolution of continuity or with needles as we have recounted in the suture of the abdomen, or add the dissolution of continuity to the gall bladder as it pleases you and let it be known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	About the extraction of those causes that occur in the two lips within the parts inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Reductions are made that in the parts inside of their lips certain hard pus masses resemble fat from veins, and some are smaller and others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	And so proceed that you convert the lips and each opening of those hard masses from every part, then prepare for their extraction by filling in the space with fine sand until the disease is strengthened, then wash them with warm water and treat the area with a stictifying agent until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	About introducing the flesh adjustment in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Reductions are made about the flesh adjustment in the gums which the ancients called albus, then proceed that you suspend that on a nail or have it hanging from your fingers and introduce that by its own force, then let the healthy blood flow or the disease run.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then place on the area with fine sand or other coagulating or drying powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then introduce it again, and cauterize it; which after the cauterization will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	About tooth extraction with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the parts inside and those at the front, as well as between the gums, there are sharp, jagged ones, some reductions have blackened and turned into citrines or vertebrae so that the gum appears through this corruption, and the teeth appear.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And thus guide that you place the patient between your hands and position their head on your shoulder, and bite into the teeth where those gums protrude causing such pain, and let the resulting taste of blood and yellow color as well as other colors within them cause changes like sand in which nothing breaks down, do this with respect to the darkness and the yellowness and among others they should be transformed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	And if that is enough for what's in the beginning of digestion, then it's good; otherwise, you will continue with the food on those other days and the second day and the third until it reaches the desired outcome in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have need of refined metals in various forms and of different shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for knowing which razor to use for the tooth that is being prepared inside is different from the razor used between teeth in other forms, and these forms of razors should be prepared by you as you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter.xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On removing teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	And that you heal the tooth from its pain all through the operation and take your time in the complete extraction of it, so that there is no reason to replace the loss when it is extracted, which is a substance that causes inflammation during the extraction of the tooth.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	And when the patient feels that tooth needing to be extracted, you must confidently certify which is the painful tooth, because different inflammations cause pain and drop into a healthy tooth, and then you extract that one, but the pain doesn't subside until the maligned tooth and causing pain is removed, which we have seen already during the operation of barbies.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	And when you must certify which is the painful tooth, and knowing this well, then you should scrape in the area of the tooth with its gum where there might be any defect, so that it dissolves from the tooth's gingiva all around, and then you proceed to cut at your touch, or with fine blades starting small gradually until that defect is eliminated.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then cut with strong gripping force for good conversation or impact strength, and place the head of the patient between your hands so that you have to not let it slip, and proceed to remove the tooth according to rectitude in manner so as not to damage it, nor give more pain to the jawbone.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not easily removed, then take one of those instruments, and hold the patient's hand from all sides with ease and make the removal as forcefully as possible, just like at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	And if the tooth is embedded or corroded, then you should fully cover it with a cloth and tightly hold onto its slender extremity so that it doesn't get stuck during your tightening around it with your hands.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And make your incision precisely during the scraping of all parts of the gum and preserve your strength so as not to damage it and break a part of it, and return over the jawbone for its sharpness to be more than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do during their rashness and impudence in tooth extraction, which they don't administer as we have recommended; because various inflammations bring about severe jaw pains that are more difficult to remove, and all the razors of them become dull or some of those ones, or you extract that one through certain bones of the mandible as we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after removing the tooth, wash the mouth with vinegar or add salt to it.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if you need to remove pus for this purpose, just like in inflammations, then apply a small quantity of garlic and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that garlic doesn't work, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and delicate tongs by which teeth are grasped at the beginning is long extremity, with a short handle and thickness, so that they don't bend when working on those.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be such as thick handles between which when you straighten them with those, they are not bent, and their long extremities are short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And let them be made of Indian iron with straight long extremities, and in the extremities of those are teeth that one fits into the other and extend by gradual thickening, and some inflammations have the form of a beak of a pelican which is called a stork, so it's strong grip, and they have a strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter.xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On tooth extraction and bone removal from the cracked jawbone.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is stuck due to some reason, then you should place your hand over the spot where it is located by one day or two until the area softens; and then use your fingers or grasp with your tongs which are assembled in the beak of a pelican called stork or gloves, the shape of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of them should be made inside like a file or an axe.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you don't comply with your judgment about these forceps or tongs, then you should dig into the gum and scrape all the flesh, and insert an instrument called an atali, which is a small lever whose shape is like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And whether it's a large or small extremity, don't let it cool down so that it doesn't freeze.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the remedy is to be pierced, yes it is; otherwise, help yourself with these other tools of which these are the forms: the form of the first tool is triangular at the extremity in which there's some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second tool is that it be triangular and have a particularly subtle extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now help yourself with this tool having two ramps, of which this form is the one nearby:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and among other tools which are used in tooth filing; when this youth is made with this tool which resembles a large cat, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the triangular, twisted or short extremity, which has some thickness, don't let it cool down so that it doesn't freeze.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And know these tools for tooth removal are similar to the other tools.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the artisans be skillful and subtle in their art, find what suits them according to what it means for their operation and various diseases; among which are the diseases to which the ancients neither described nor used any specific tool, due to the various species' forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the bone of the mandible or other bones of the mouth be frozen, if so place your weight on that at its spot according to what is convenient for you among the tools and the forceps which we have said in removing tooth roots, and help yourself with this gesture, having this form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there's any thickness, remove it gradually little by little, and bind or hold the mouth to prevent swelling or escape until all the bone is removed; then restore the area with suitable medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there's a small pus pocket in the bone, then remove that along with its darkness, and treat it from within until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of distinguished teeth over others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are eminent not according to their natural course as in those cases, especially when it's prominent among women and even more so among elderly revered ladies; thus consider: if the tooth is very close to another tooth, and direct extraction or application of a salve for it is impossible, then you must leave that one alone. However, if it is not attached to another tooth, then proceed with this tool which has this form; it resembles the removal of pork fat, made from Indian iron with an extremely sharp end.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And if your incision is on the part where you would have to remove that tooth after days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it's not the same as another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is an eminent tooth that needs to be filed down, then file it with Indian iron inlaying tool which has this form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it's all made of Indian iron with the groove where it is used to make punctures like when filing using nails which grind teeth gradually over soft days, so that no other tooth gets damaged and falls out.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then draw it at the end, and cut that with some small razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it's a tooth where one part is frozen and touches the tongue, then you should grind that area until the roughness of that portion is eliminated and leveled out, making sure the tongue doesn't hurt or confuse words.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On restoring teeth that have fallen out, using gold or silver fillings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are lost due to percussion or impact damage, and the patient cannot hold up against what they bite on, you have treated that with stiptic medicines, but your treatment hasn't worked. Then for those that remain loose only in gold fillings and not silver ones should be used, as silver corrodes over time and might take several days to apply, but gold never changes color.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the filler be of such subtlety and density according to how much it can enter between the teeth; as for the process, take the filler and hold twice that amount between two healthy teeth. Then allow both ends of the filler to grow outwards until they reach the thread on the sound tooth from the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the process into the part where you started, strengthen your hand with skill and knowledge so that it doesn't get loose.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And when tightening the filler, ensure you don't damage the teeth that you're treating.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then use forceps or pluck them all out from the excess ends of the filler. Add those to every spot with your gesture and mix them between the healthy tooth and the loose tooth, ensuring it doesn't harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then smooth that out like a Roman would do.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	May if it's slipped or broken, strengthen that or those with another filler in such a manner throughout its entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of restoring two healthy teeth and two loose ones, as seen in these instances tied together:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it's done to return one tooth or two in their respective places, and they've grown back as we have described, and that they grow.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do this only if skilled artisans and wise people are involved.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some sores are suitable for certain causes of the bones of cattle, and it is made from them in this form like a tooth, placed in the location where the tooth fails, and it is strengthened just as we have said, and remains and serves there for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Regarding the tongue disease which manifests in speech and forbids speaking.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which leaves the tongue with some sores or is natural in which one is born, or accidental and happens due to illness which has already become established.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation for them is that you open their mouth, at its original opening in their usual position; and lift their tongue, then proceed to cut that ligament nerve according to the width within which the tongue's recent size fits.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If in that there is any hardness or obstruction, and this has become established due to illness, then you cut one and divide that along the width within which you have divided the ligament and dissolve the obstruction.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And make sure that there is not a cut made in the edge of the flesh and that you divide here carefully so that no pus flows out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And afterwards, wash the marks of the incision with warm water or with vinegar or with soap; and place your tongue back in its usual position; thus, you have to ensure that the patient's tongue remains in every night so that it does not become hardened into another sore.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If pus should come out, place over the spot a glass cup; but if the blood flows, then apply a pointed cautery to that area which is suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And treat that cure with the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Regarding the extraction of a cyst on the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some sores occur on the tongue resembling small blisters, preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and the swelling becomes magnified as it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the procedure for them is to open the mouth of the patient facing the sun, and inspect the cyst.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you find it of a dark color or black, hard, which the patient cannot feel, then do not touch that lump as it is movable.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is of a whitish color, where there is moisture, then you insert the knife in it, and cut that with a fine point, and cut all around; and if pus comes out during your operation, then you place over it a glass cup, as a kind of glass, from which the pus can be drained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And proceed with your work until you have treated it properly for him, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and treat that with other remedies until it heals.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Regarding the extraction of cysts from both ears and that which is contained in the parotid gland, as well as other cysts.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you encounter in the parotid gland, they are glands which are woven with fat, and which occur outside, known as the two ears, and when you treat them as we have said in the division and if they do not heal, then you should consider whether the cyst is hard, of a dark color, without much sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of reddish color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the pus flow; wait until it softens by itself, then either you pierce it, or it will break on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, soft, and the root of it is fine, then that is one to be cut.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the procedure for them is that before your operation you consider whether it has rested, after being cauterized and a complete rest period, or if there has been some diminution due to any diminution; then have the patient facing the sun, his head in its usual position, open their mouth, and take their tongue forward with both hands while they hold an instrument of noble form, which this is:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or gold, and should be fine as a thread.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press the tongue and show him the cyst to you, if you feel it with your fingers, then take the knife and place it in the mouth, and pull it outwards as much as possible from all directions.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or when you pull on any cause of the membranes, then proceed to cut that with the tool which has this form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is similar to forceps, however the extremities of it are curved, so that each one's opening is in front of the other, sharp tools made of iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this tool is not available to you at the moment, then cut it with a fine point, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have cut one seam, cut the other according to this method of incision, and afterwards let the incision dry with soap water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you encounter pus coming out, let it dry with the decoction of spinach or rue leaves and resemble that in the remedies for stopping bleeding where the pus flow can be restricted, then proceed to treat it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Some healings occur in the gallbladder and other blisters under those two ears, and you introduce those according to what I said in the instruction for treating two kinds of illnesses equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I had treated a woman with a blister which was located in her gallbladder, that blister took on a dark color and had little sensation, it had already filled up the gallbladder of her, and the woman was breathing very heavily, she had also been forbidden to eat or drink water from then on, and she was already close to death if not relieved within one or two more days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the blister had become so large that it contained two months' worth of intestines which were passing through two wounds.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So I treated her surgically and had her lie down on one of their elbows, then I pulled out that (intestine), and removed the large portion from her. Then I introduced that which corresponds to the other wound, and placed my hand over her mouth, and compressed her tongue, and I positioned the elbow above that blister.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I removed a large part of it, only some small bleeding was coming from her.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	So the gallbladder of that woman was completely healed, she began to drink water immediately, and shortly after started eating food again. So I didn't stop introducing medicines into that blister for a long time, and then another blister formed in place of it, which continued to grow as that one did.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So I put it in and cauterized her gallbladder, from then on she recovered; and later I walked around wondering what God had done to me after this.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On treating a swollen area when it is blistered.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When phlegm accumulates in the uvula, and it is blistered and long, then it is named perpendicularly; and if it's located at the thick and round part, then it is called a lump.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it has healed as we have said in the division, and your healing does not agree with this, and since the blistered cautery is already finished for you and it is subtle, then consider that you should introduce that which was added round; and if it's along that length, and it bleeds, of dark color or black, and is not at your fingertips, then consider trying to start introducing it, where there is fear on the throat.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you do it according to the method I have told you about its whiteness and length, that you check the throat and press on her tongue with an instrument of which one's form can be understood, then place your elbow in the new position, pull that out downwards and introduce that along one of two instruments as mentioned in the instructions for treating two kinds of illnesses.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And consider that you should not introduce that but what is adjusted over the natural end of your addition, for if you introduce too much from it, you will injure his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the introduction, use that which we have recommended in the instructions for treating two kinds of illnesses, and care for it so that she/he becomes healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the throat was frightened by the introduction of it, consider using iron in its cauterization to alleviate his/her fear, and the method of cauterization is simply with hot water. So you place your head on her/his throat, then press her/his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, take that water which we have mentioned in the cauterization chapter, spread it alive over there, hold it neither thick nor subtle, and fill the cavity of that instrument whose form is as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of his/her cavity be where the medicine is placed just like in a vessel, and place the instrument over her/his throat so that saliva or saliva-like secretion from her/his mouth occurs due to the intrinsical medicine, so that it does not cause any harm to his/her gallbladder and heals him/her.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And place your hand on the medicine, and squeeze it over the uvula for about half an hour until you see that it has darkened and calmed due to eating the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take out and wrap it around the end of the thread, immerse the thread in the medicine, insert the thread into the hole with the thread above so that the thread sticks to that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, then leave it until it dries and falls off around three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to reapply the medicine, do that, and after the cauterization, clean it in the uvula circuit with a chewed thread, change what is inside that circuit of her/his medicine, and wash it with water rinse, and treat externally with embrocation, and internally with remedies until she/he becomes healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of treatment is safe that one who heals avoids fear and remains long.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some healings are done to the uvula with that which is more subtle than cauterization and introduction, which is healed through subinhalation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, ruda, Arabic gum, camomile, butter, and similar from those herbs, adjust all of these causes or some of them into one vessel, let them be submerged with strong vinegar, boil; and the decoction should be strained well, and there is a tube in the middle of that vessel on which an aram-made siphon instrument is placed according to this manner; it can be made of silver or gold.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And immerse the extremity in the mouth of the patient inside where the steam rises to the uvula over the eustachian tube, inside where the uvula is moved and obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeatedly apply heat to those dried spots within which it dries, and be careful not to perform this treatment immediately after the appearance of pustules, as it could exacerbate in the pustule, and do not allow you to do this way, but rather announce the presence of pustule with caut.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	May it not be that you present this instrument, then take a stick and make a wick in the extremity of the patient, so that the mouth of the patient can breathe freely, as the wick of the hemp prevents steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Chapter XXXVIII.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Dried spots adhere in the gallbladder or thorns of leaves or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	And when you remove what is obvious there, over which your eye sees, because you press the tongue against the instrument in front of yourself, so that it becomes clear to you what is in the gallbladder.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not seen and is hidden in the gallbladder, so you should make the patient vomit before food digests in the stomach; because a strong cause connected to the gallbladder causes vomiting; or get the patient to swallow a spoonful of water or grated lettuce or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried marine sponge and tie it firmly with string, then make the patient swallow that; and when it reaches the place where thorns are found, so that they are extracted.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And you take a wriggler and drink it in the tied string, until it enters your mouth slowly and is extracted; or take a spoon and carefully put it inside, then carefully bring it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if they have not become evident through those causes we mentioned, then use a lead instrument according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be as thick as that of a small one, and within its extremity is an opening which you insert into their gallbladder for ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And let the patient raise their head upwards, and be careful not to touch their throat bone for fear of damaging it or causing that which covers the bone or thorn to move, or what the doctor places with their hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But let the patient that one insert honey, according to their knowledge of the location of the related cause and push it down, then pull their hand towards the instrument, all this as per the amount prepared within them so that it is extracted.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Chapter XXXIX.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treated with the medicines we have discussed in the division of treatment using medicines and they do not work, consider this for the gallbladder of the patient in front of yourself, because you should press down the tongue of the patient with an instrument which we recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you twist the blood vessel, extract it either as a small dot or in finer details carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it from there, then take a concave cannula and insert that into the gallbladder of the patient, and place in the concavity of the cannula a red-hot iron, and do this as many times (while the blood vessel is dead and comes out of the gallbladder) and keep the patient away from water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And take a gourd full of water to drink, and open the mouth of the patient in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not swallow any cause from that, let her drink water for an hour after another on her own hand, as soon as she feels the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	And if it is not extracted with what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cinnamon or with asafetida using the instrument which we recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and let it take effect where it falls.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another method of operation in fumigation is that you take a burning coal and place it inside a container covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is an opening. And place the end of the instrument inside this opening; and proceed to fumigate above; and have the patient hold their mouth at the end of the cannula, then close their mouth so that the fumigation does not go out until you know that the fumigation has reached the blood vessel, as soon as the blood vessel falls.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it doesn't fall, then you should repeat the fumigation several times, and keep the patient from drinking, eat salty foods and herbs, and don't drink water. It's essential that this regimen be carried out properly.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument by which blood vessels in the gallbladder are treated when seen; and it resembles forceps as well, except when it's curved within them:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Which is flat against the gallbladder, and its extremity resembles the beak of a stork that's been polished with emery, because when you grasp any cause, it won't slip.
Capitol .xl.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In this, the whole speech is concerned with regard to sores and in sections about them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The sores are special spots, of various shapes, according to their memory, from any in this free.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are different in piercing and section regarding them by two ways, of which one is for the peculiarity of sores within themselves; and thus we acquire from humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is towards the places where accidents occur in the body, for when an abscess occurs in the head it is another of abscess occurring in the buttocks; and abscess in the fleshly location is another from abscess occurring at joints; and each one's method is by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some of the abscesses are those which, when not pierced, but rather mature under treatment in those or completion of them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses are those which rupture when crossed, and do not mature according to their completion, such as abscesses near joints, for when an abscess is near a joint, its being extends within it thus what is in the circuit of it, and strengthens the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing a contraction of that limb; or it is abscess near the main member, and if you delay piercing it until it matures inside the main member; or it is near the buttocks, therefore perforate the un-matured one; and do not pierce the cross-ruptured ones due to incomplete digestion, but the one near the buttocks, so that you don't weaken its force and make it extend into parts deep inside the buttocks, making a fistula; or when done in the terminal part of it which is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	It suffices to know the time for piercing the abscess, and this is when it matures.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	Know that it matures when there is a cessation of pain and the disappearance of fever, and approximately a reduction in sweating and pulse rate, and the sharpness of the abscess tip, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when you know how to pierce in the place of pus left by the abscess and pus coming from the cure of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Pierce at the right length in the flesh or body, when abscesses are located on parts of the chest or feet, and on spots of laceration, cords of nerves, arteries; and later, in all equal places that do not reflect light; for those that are reflected, use piercing according to that limb.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	And when the abscess is in a fleshly area, it suffices to let the piercing of it happen after confirming its digestion according to completion, as we have said; for if you pierce that one before this, it extends the course of pus and of stubborn matter, and strengthens the swelling around it, and its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	And such abscesses are pierced according to the width of the flesh or body depending on necessity, or according to what the limb needs.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And know that you should administer small piercings, and in large abscesses, a large piercing or wide sections according to the variety of sizes of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other abscesses are those in which you should return the lumen to its cavity and have it sealed up when done thus with bread and done like that until completion, as occurs in many cases of galls and boils.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised to the section have three corners; and of those that is done like a snail's shell shape, as with abscesses in the limbs.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of them there are those that have round sections and lunar sections, and resemble them.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	And for the one without a hole like those of superficial lion abscesses, it suffices to pierce it with superficial piercing, or flatly only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is thick and has already collected pure matter, pierce it without worrying about removing all the pus in that moment; after extracting from it one part, then return the abscess inside another day, then extract a larger part, and proceed with drained spots according to graduation until it becomes perforated.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	Especially so if the body is cold and vital force, or a woman in pregnancy, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, when the animal spirit's vitiated matter is resolved with the expulsion of pureness, and strengthens the body, then you open them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care of this chapter, and when you pierce in which you are piercing these abscesses, know that you cleanse the wounds and consider whether the pus of the abscess is little or a flat section; then administer what belongs to it or its opposite. And if the abscess is large, and the cracks from the piercing are spots, then know that you pause at each point so they pass in time.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess you removed part of the lumen or made it concave in the channel, then know that you complete it with old wax or a thread sewn from the skin; as when you are sifting pans or ashes, remove moisture; and strengthen it on the third day; then proceed with that and cure whatever comes from the ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If it happens that there is bleeding from the veins during your operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar to them. Place a linen cloth under several of these, and pause that over the site of the blood flow in the veins for a while.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, then continue with your treatment and care, and use the powders I have recommended in specific locations of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it's during winter, and the site of the abscess is a location of nerve points, then cover that with vinegar and oil in a poultice, and place those over the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it's in summer, and the sites are fatty, then cover that with poultices made from ground powders in water or oil mixed with vinegar and oil, and let all of this be rubbed for an entire day as we have said, and then cover that by releasing the abscess and cleaning it off, administering care according to what suits him until he is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus is what is necessary about the knowledge of treating abscesses universally, but according to the path of distinction that I have said for all abscesses in how they should be treated through individual chapters specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Section on abscesses which occur in the chain of operations.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the chain of head operations, small abscesses occur, which are special cases of lymph nodes containing tunics that are part of their structure; and these various aspects are their nature.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And about their pus, and those are the ones that contain a moisture-like substance similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those which contain moisture resembling dust, and are like them; and of those which are hardened, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as with the extraction of those does not cause a dislocation of an arrow.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you insert an instrument of its shape into them as closely as possible, which is called a probe, so that you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If what it contains is moisture, then split that along the section according to length in a superficial section following this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin at the section of line .B. between the line of .G. Thus as moisture is evacuated, then you scrape off that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause thereof, for if there remains any cause it will return after a while.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment if there is any, or instead with water and salt; fill that wound with this concoction and let it rest until another day, when you scrape off everything that has eroded from that skin layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeatedly apply this ointment on that skin with Egyptian ointment the second and third times if you need it, so trust that there is no remaining cause of that skin layer; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess contains fatty lumps, then you should cut into that according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	in the section have a cross-shaped form, and make cuts between both sides of the section and go all around with it, and apply your strength in extracting the tunic which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If an arrow causes resistance when pulling it out, then do what I told you to do at first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do this for the hardened abscess in section and treatment according to what we told you; and the section over a hardened abscess is mild pus, which has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some of these abscesses are cases from these types which occur in the head in certain men where there is not much moisture; this cause is that I split on an abscess at the top of a female elderly person and crushed the abscess like a dumb hard white, which could not be punctured, and if it were touched by any, it would inflame that area.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	And in other abscesses that occur on the head, this is not within this chapter, such as abscesses that come from the ears of children, you must understand the reasons for the ear lobes; but these sections are superficial sections.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those from the lowest part of their body, so that it relieves the body from the parts with lower pus.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat those according to what suits for their treatment process.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Section on the condition of scrofula, which occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses are seen in the neck and armpits, as well as under the chin; some occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And these that occur in the neck are lumps that are produced internally between them, and all scrofula of these is within their own tunic, just like with lymph nodes and abscesses on the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The types of these scrofula are lumps which some contain hardness, and some contain moisture, and the malignant ones do not yield to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	And in that one where you have good judgment in the Palpation, whose color reveals shows as akin to the color of the body and is present throughout the area, not attached to neck nerves or veins, nor to arrows, not being round, so when you insert into it on a dry superficial part above the part below your neck line between lines G and B, and burn it all around, spread both sides of the body from this with oil or with onion if you need those as we have said in abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And more care than not to damage the vein or nerves.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And if the knife is not too sharp, that it does not hurt you as you cut or causes discomfort to the patient, and that you avoid cutting what is unnecessary; so if you were to cut a vein or artery and stopped your operation, then pause in the inflamed wound with soothing powders or other substances that cause drainage, strengthen the wound, and leave it there until the inflammation subsides and the wound softens, thus beginning to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the infection is removed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	So resume your operation while you have achieved it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire about any reason for the other small lymph nodes according to your diagnosis, so cut those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it's in the location of the lymph node that has a large vein, know that you should not cut that lymph node from its location.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you operate, ensure that the one being operated on is lying flat and that it remains in that position so that its body can accommodate the procedure.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old wax which you have already submerged in Egyptian balm, and then attend to it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut the lymph node completely, then ensure that you adjust both sides of the wound and leave a little pus that does not cause any swelling or excess.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	Perhaps if there is excessive swelling due to the size of the lymph node, ensure that you understand where to cut its location, remove that and administer suture according to what has been said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those lymph nodes containing moisture, puncture that through the surface of your location where it appears in the patient's body, pause at a puncturing point of what has drained from the bottom of their pus, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then, when you perform the puncture, use ointment and something similar for it, so that it can erode whatever is rotten from the infection.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you operate on the wound that has already been cleaned, then treat it with generative meat balm until it heals.
Capitol .xliii.	Capítulo 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	From the section about the pocket of pus inside the gallbladder.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients treated this section in the appendix, and no one I know of has ever done that in our land.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the record of the speech about those things.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Perhaps in people who have corners, ensure that the removal of the appendix is avoided, as thus it should not be done impulsively for fear that all the veins and major vessels of the body are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	Perhaps in those who have lymph swellings in the mouth or gallbladder or behind the ears, when the illness is not in the tooth, use this section of the appendix to avoid the danger which is caused by puncturing.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So when we want this, cut the appendix leaving three circles of the circles of the appendix, or four at a smaller section by width in that which is between two circles for quantity, so that the section is in the muscle, not on the cartilage. This location is suitable for sectioning as it lacks flesh and the blood vessels of their body are there.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the surgeon is afraid, know that he should extend the gallbladder's string to the kidney, then make a slit in the string until it reaches the duct, but avoid any blood vessels if you see one of those reasons.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the gallbladder according to what we have described; and it means on the section of the duct by the inflammation which comes from that exit to what is of their disturbance, and by the rupture of the bile duct.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And so when the time is ripe for the puncture to be made, add two layers of the skin from the wound's string, and leave that alone until it reaches the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause meat to grow while it heals.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Al-Būkārī that the sum of our speech which we have described, is nothing more than to see that some of those lymph nodes have already swollen in the gallbladder of the body, and the body has gone into death, and his soul left its place, and others would cut open the epiglottis so that the body could breathe on the location of the wound for a certain breath, thus saving them from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason, we command that the wound be left open until the malevolence of the illness is consumed; and the malevolence of its body lasts three days; and then from there we command thus on the wound, treat it while it heals.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant placed a cot in her gallbladder and cut part of the lung canal there, and I was called to treat him, and it responded just like the cry of those who are dead, and discovered the wound and found the blood which was stuck inside the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So I confessed that it did not cut a vein or artery, and the wind was coming from the wound, and treated that until it healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And nothing happened to the servant except maybe in her bile, and some days later returned to improving her health.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now let me say that in the section of the inguinal region there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Regarding the section on abscesses that occur outside the groin area, it is called a hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This large abscess called a hernia of the groin changes color according to the body's color, and moves in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental case occurs in two ways; one is like fatty lumps, and the other way is like an abscess formed by blockage of an artery. In that case, there is fear (meaning concern or urgency).
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it should not be assumed that the lump feels like iron without being small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should test that (the lump) and investigate it as described. If you find something resembling fatty lumps, not hanging on any of the veins, then you incise it like a node, extract it up to where it is contained within the skin and subcutaneously; otherwise, thoroughly examine its entire nature, and treat the area with what promotes healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Regarding the section on the types of lumps/nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The types of lumps are various, and I have already described all the types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And remember that I will describe this difference between a lump and an ulcer to avoid confusion.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So I say that for ulcers, there is a heat and fever and violent pains within which quench the boiling of excess; and the process of putrefaction is completed when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	For lumps, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and within that is a white pus which is peculiar to the lump.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And according to the body's color, its onset is like a boil and it develops similarly to a cavity, whether large or small. They are divided into two types; one that is fatty and contains humidity, and the colors of humidity are varied as I described in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So when you come to the treatment of lumps, extract it and inquire about its beginning with a cause which is called an incisor, according to how its form will resemble this chapter.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiring about abscesses and all lumps; you should take this incisor and insert it into the pus-filled wet area you find in the abscess, and gently turn your words inside bit by bit until you know that the incisor has penetrated the membrane.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And finally, place your hand according to the size of the abscess, and then extract the incisor and consider what is left in its wake.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the humidity is removed, regardless of its color, then you should incise it at the superficial section as I have said in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity left in the wake of the incisor, then you will know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry over it at the superficial section has the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Like this instruction, suspend it on the handle, and scrape away the membrane from all sides with ease, and preserve the skin or sack if you can over that, then extract that healthy part from the lump.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	For if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy part, and various scabs may form under this, and then you extract it in pieces so that nothing damages it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	And if any damage is done to it, whether a little or too much, the lump will return according to the manner.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that part of it has been damaged slightly, then complete the wound with some corrosive sharp powders and strengthen the wound, place a cautery over that which is prone to abscesses, and treat it otherwise until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the lump is large, then you cut both lips of it and treat what forms inside.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if there is a pulsating vein against it, or not, then you clean and heat the area of that torn skin which resembles glass and smooth that stretched skin for two days or three until the wound heals up; then return to incising what has hardened from the lump.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Regarding the necessary forms of an incisor in sections and puncturing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Among those are the forms of incisors, which are of three species; some are large, and among them is a slightly smaller one, and among them is a small one.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large incisor is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the slightly smaller incisor is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small incisor is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They should be made of iron, aluminum, or the ends ground appropriately to ensure they penetrate into abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of experienced incisors, and they are called needles; one of them is called red.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	They come in three varieties, which include large, slightly smaller, and very small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experienced one, it looks like this:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the slightly smaller experienced one, it looks like this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The way of experiencing it, the form of him:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It concerns those abscesses and ulcers, fistulas and swellings where within those are from the bones and from other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they make round cuts, large ones, like lions, similar to big needles with which the ulcers are sewn up, and they are made from emery, or from stone, or from iron, or from silver. And the best ones are those made from emery.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they make them the experiences of black feathers, which are remembered that for those there are opened fistulas in the cavity where reflections take place, that are reflected on their lightness onto those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three types; some of them are long, and of others it is midway, and of the others short, according to the amount of size of the fistula and the constriction of him.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the great lead experience:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the midway lead experience:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small lead experience:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the knives are special spots, which among them are some simple ones, where there is only a curvature, and they are of three types: large, few, and midway.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their knives are sharp, and they are of three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among those are two curved knives, and they are also of three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And their have three curves each, and they are of three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a single large knife, form of him:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a single midway knife:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a single small knife, form of him:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of an enlarged sharp knife:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a midway sharp knife, form of him:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small sharp knife, form of him:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large curved knife with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a midway curved knife with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small curved knife with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large curved knife with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a midway curved knife with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small curved knife with three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which they sever and destroy the glands and abscesses, and they are of three types; among them is large, midway, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the mid-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of the small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of those where section is made are sharp and the other ends are non-sharp, and they are not held in such a manner but rather that the fear of vein or nerve incision during the scratching of glands remains, and through them the patient finds relief and gains tranquility with some adjustment which causes you to find the scraping of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of pins, and they are of three types: large, midway, and small, like arrows.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large needle:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of a mid-sized needle:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of a small needle:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made from iron and resemble rays in which alcohol is applied.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it's at the tip where there is a pierced end hidden under the skin and within that there flows towards both inside and outside directions, whenever you want, as seen.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of the spatulas, which are hidden between your fingers, you should puncture the abscesses and not feel the patients, and they are of three types: large, midway, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms for suction cups from which the blood flow is removed, and they are of three types: large, midway, and small; these are the forms of him:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made from emery citri, round with some length, and they are fine.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And choose these types of suction cups that are large, midway, and small for when you need to remove blood flow at speed in necessity, and then when your first remedy fails.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those to remove blood in every part of the body, and only use them on fatty areas; like those in the greasy spots and thighs, and in the bumps of arms, breasts, nipples, belly, testicles, and resemble those in the fatty greasy bumps.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some operations are done with those instruments or smaller pieces resembling needles according to this shape; when blood is removed through phlebotomy, or for incision of vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some operations are round and done in accordance with this shape:
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol .xlvii (Chapter or section number 47)
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Regarding the treatment of male breasts which are assembled by females.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some operations cause swelling of the breasts of some male patients when they start to become fatty, and then these breasts are swollen, resembling female breasts, and causing them to be distant.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who experience this, know that you should incise those at the lunar section according to this shape, from the line of .B. into the line of .G., and then scratch off all the roughness, and fill the wound with medicinal matter, and adjust both parts of the wound for sewing, and heal it internally once it has been healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the nipple is lowered to the parts and relieved by its size just as it happens in women, then it should be cut into two sides of pus there, each with two sections resembling a lunar figure, with each contained within the other. The longer line must contain the shorter according to this form of .B.'s and .G.'s lines. Then scrape out the seam which is between two lips of the lesion, keep back the swelling, and administer the stitch procedure and powders necessary for treatment during recovery until it's healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you don't follow the instructions to apply this remedy due to anxiety about the patient and the discharge of pus, then you should smear the lesion with a cut and submerge it in corrosive ointment, letting that part be corroded by what dissolves fat, and treat that area until it's healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Regarding the puncturing of abscesses that cause pain in the hands.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that cause pain in the hand are of the species of scrofulas, tubers, which have a layer that is to be removed.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain moisture; and of these that contain moisture, you should puncture them according to a lunar section as shown in this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B.. Once everything that is inside the pus has been evacuated, then you complete them with a cut and let it heal by the other day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And after that, keep treating the area with suitable ointment until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the species of nodes or tubers, then you should cut over it as we have said in the section about tubers equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the lesion is extended to such an extent that pus leaks out all around, then administer the cautery according to what we have mentioned before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Regarding the section on abscesses that occur due to surgery or through a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the incision is ruptured and the seam is consolidated which was on that side, then pus forms causing an abscess. The signs to identify whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: when an abscess is due to an artery, it extends for a long time in the preon of the body; and when you press the abscess at your fingertips, you feel stridulation in that area.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And one that is due to a vein appears prominently throughout the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And if this abscess is a mistake, especially in those with symptoms and around the elbows, in the neck, and in localized body pains; it's very large, so you should avoid its treatment with iron, and that one on the extremities or at the head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	About the one that is due to inflammation of the incision of the artery, cut along the seam in the long direction; then cut across with scissors and approach the incision, freeing from the tunics until it's discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And afterwards handle that needle and have it penetrate into the other side, strengthen the incision with thread twice in two places -- which causes you to feel in your skill when extracting two arteries which are among the templars.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And after that prick the area that is between two ligaments in the chest until all pus that is there leaks out and is dissolved by the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And after that, administer treatment in which you create pus so that the ligaments fall; and treat that with suitable ointments until it's healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it's an abscess due to a vein, then you should know how much there is of the pus from that place on your hand compared to where you have your hand on your head, and after that insert the needle at the spot that you've been holding in your hand, and have it penetrate; then cut through the thread twice so that you extract that one from the other side, and treat that by tying the abscess with a ligament according to what I've said to you about the ligament of an apple which is divided into two parts at both ends of the string.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that you will extract the thread, then insert the needle at that needle where all pus should be cut off from the first needle position, and strengthen your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Approach to dry the abscess in its middle where when what is inside it is settle, then cut off the excess of the seam and let that which comes out from it be bound.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And after that place over the powder you have immersed in vinegar and oil, and proceed with treatment which is done with cloths and ointments until it's healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 50: Regarding the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	In the same way that abscesses occur in arteries and veins, similarly abscesses occur in nerves when they are injured during percussion or due to excessive work, and thus.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the procedure for this is in the places of the ligaments or at the wrist, or everywhere where joints swell.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And the abscess is heavy, has the same color as the rest of the body, occurs in major areas of their disposition, and when it's stretched under pressure, one feels the patient as if they were stunned.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it does not form a clot in the heart, and by itself it breaks the chain, and he is hurt on all sides and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So concerning those that are in the joints, it is not iron that should be enclosed in them, but a strong force that will counteract contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	It may be in the head or on the forehead where the chain binds with pus.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a small clot, then you have it in the lungs and remove it from the cause of illness.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you suspend it with a string, scrape off that which is causing the illness, and properly place that part; then suture the wound and treat it until it has healed.
Capitol .li.	End of chapter.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Regarding the section on gangrene that occurs from eating what causes illness in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Dealing with various swellings found in the abdomens of those and other parts of the body of those, which are called fungal because they resemble fungi, where their cause is subtle but their head is large; already the lips of these are swollen, it's from those that are small, and it's from those that are greatly magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, where in the belly of that person there were two parts resembling fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, of very little illness.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of these would be inverted and split open, moisture flowed continuously from that area.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I inserted them and examined each one in a person whose weight was eighteen ounces. And the other weighed six ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And for the operation during their insertion is to consider if the patient is wet, and if the color of the disease is white, wet, with a subtle illness; then you insert them in pus laterally, and place them in front of you under heat, the swellings that are formed should be removed from the area; and if you find the infection, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient is fearful and trembling, guard against inserting it with iron; rather take a lead that has been recently made, and strengthen that disease, the method of which is as we have said; let that alone for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And adjust to the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease strengthening large lead in this part until it is scraped off and falls by itself through its work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If that part is from severe illness, then during its insertion there is some cause for fear and trembling, especially in the case of those located in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It's possible that you might scrape off its essence, and then cauterize it so that it doesn't return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And afterwards treat it until the wound has healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And remember that you should not presume to insert a part of dark color, with little sensation, under careful observation, for such is inherently cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will return to further reflection on this matter soon.
Capitol .lii.	End of chapter fifty.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Regarding the treatment of the navel prominence.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Navel prominence is caused by various factors; or due to fissures on the abdomen, which is above the belly, and you see the skin or intestine according to what happens in other ruptures; or through infection that flows from a vein or artery as was previously mentioned, or due to constricted wind within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it's due to a tear in the crotch and skin inflammation, then the color of the clot resembles the color of the body; and there is intense pain, and you see various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it's due to protrusion of the intestine, then its location is in that place from what we've recounted, with greater intensity and diversity. As you press that onto your own fingers, it disappears, and then returns; the strength lies on yourself so, and a great effort should be exerted for this introduction of balm and intense work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it's due to moisture, then there is pain and it doesn't disappear when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor does it swell.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it's due to infection, then these signs appear for the clot turning black and fading in color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it's due to flesh alone, then this is a heavy, large, hard clot that develops according to an amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it's due to wind, then the sensation within it is intense.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And for the operation in this case is that you need to consider if the navel prominence is due to artery infection, or vein infection, or wind; then it must be avoided treating it, because there is fear and trembling just as we taught in the chapter about clots from arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the navel prominence is due to the intestine or the membrane, then you should command the patient that they should have their head elevated and be lying extended. Then test along the entire circumference of the navel, and command the patient to lie with their back against your hands on each side of their body. Then surround it laterally with pus inside the circumference around the area you tested; then extend the clot upwards in parts using a large string or rope, and tie it tightly or loosely according to the tying method.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then pierce the expanded abscess opening onto the membrane and insert your finger into that location; and if you have found or guarded it through the membrane, then you extract it immediately and push the contents of the abscess back into the abdomen's internal parts.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the membrane, then take it with a thread; and incise out its excess parts.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that area, and return to your operation afterwards. Take two needles and insert them into those two points with strength, and place the needles in the circuit you created around the abscess in a criss-cross manner, allowing them to penetrate. Then reinforce the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, hold the needles and lay the spot where you can extend the flesh and let it fall by itself; or incise there when it is thinning and lets go, then proceed to cure that area with what comes out from under the bandage once it has healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the belly button is soft or due to moisture, then drain the abscess in it as we have said earlier and remove the flesh or the moisture, which you find there; then proceed to cure that area with what comes out and consolidate the site.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of children.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	As we have said in the division, about the specific types of children and how they are treated with medicine, and that healing is done internally for those who do not become ulcerated; and we have mentioned diseases born from the carelessness and management during the treatment of children.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And it was said by the ancients that some childhood ailments can be eradicated from their location, such as in the head which is on the nipples or on the cheeks and similarly with parts of the body allocated to remove all of it, especially when they are starting out small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	And when it is old and large, do not try to reach into it yourself, which I cannot heal from that place nor have I seen another way to do so, nor has it been transmitted in this manner.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in such cases as we have said is that you proceed and let the patient bleed and cleanse from black fever some sores, then proceed to lance it if found filled with a clear discharge.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for surgery in the preparation leading up to the operation, and proceed with caution using incisions that lead to that area; and create a good concavity from all sides inside which does not damage any source of his illness.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the pus flow, do not lightly remove the abscesses, and press out the places, and cleanse away the large pus with your hand or tool, which are within reach among the tools available to you.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you find opposition from large pus or from an artery or vein, then apply cautery inside where the flow of pus has ceased, and proceed to cure that with the other treatments until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 64.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	As we have already recounted in the division, about the different types of dropsy from water and the symptoms for each type, on the treatment with medicine for them.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured internally is only the type of mild swelling alone, and it should not be subjected to internal treatment for the types of tympanic swelling or dropsy due to putrefaction, which are fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this type of water-filled swelling with medicine and it does not confirm your treatment, then consider this: if the patient has already received debility or if there is another ailment related to dropsy elsewhere like in their chest or similar locations, then refrain from treating it internally because there is concern about this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	And if you find the patient is full of vigor and in them there is no other ailment but water-filled swelling only, not pregnancy nor old age, then the method for operating on it is that you lift the patient between your hands, ministering to them as closely as possible making them expel their belly with your hand, push out the water from the remaining part of the pelvic cavity and take on a spine instrument according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two long sharp parts, with an acute tip like a spine; however, it is better if it is somewhat shorter in them little by little, so that during the operation you do not go into the intestine and let the patient bleed.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the production of dropsy is from the intestines, then you should have the section away from the belly button by an amount of three fingers to the parts remaining, in the right side above the pelvic cavity.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the production of dropsy is due to a kidney ailment, then your section should be on the left side of the belly button by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the production is due to milk, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not have your section over the side where the patient wishes to bleed, because pus will not flow towards that location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce the instrument through the entire thickness of the skin, proceed to insert it in that section, lift your hand over the spine and the scaphoid, and scrape off that area; and if it's as much as a fingernail or slightly more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then I pierce the bladder so that it reaches the desired location, this is the place of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then remove that and insert an instrument with this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It is similar to a fine silver cannula; it's made of silver or copper or lion's bone, at the lower end of which there is a small hook, and on its sides are three hooks: two from one side and one from another; and its extremity is cut like a feather according to the method, just as sometimes:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the top of its extremity there is a ring, which when the instrument reaches the water, immediately presses on it, thus expels some amount of water in the middle part; if you evacuate more from this than necessary during that time, weaken the patient through dissolving their animal spirit, or they may suffer from an apoplexy that leads to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Evacuate from that according to the virtue's quantity and according to what you interpret from the disposition of the patient regarding the virtue of their soul, as well as their goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and contain the water which causes it when immediately held back by the knot which holds the hook that is on the bladder from which you have pierced it according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeatedly use the instrument on the other day if you observe that the patient tolerates this, and extract a small amount of water, and do this for several days with fearfulness, and be careful not to let any water leak out rather than little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear for the patient, and let out a large amount of water, then treat that area by burying it in sand, washing with sweat in warm baths, and waiting under the sun for a long time; and treat that with drying medicines until they are healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply cautery to the stomach, and prepare the table and process near the extraction of water, according to what I have recounted in that which precedes this.
Capitol .lv.	Caput. lv.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Regarding the cure of children whose kidneys have not been perforated for the passage of urine.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the child's urine flows out from the mother's belly and the tip of their mixture is not perforated (or is straightly hooked or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it must be done to perforate the child immediately when born with a delicate needle according to this shape:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then place a fine lead key in the hook and hold it there, and let it for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they want to urinate, relieve them to urinate; and then return that (referring to the key).
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not hold the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place does not close this clamp.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	That of which the hook is straight must be treated with a lead key as we have said, for too many days within which it becomes larger.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Those in whom the hook is not in its place are cauterized, which causes that of those, the one that is born and the hook should extend to the end of the penis so it cannot urinate from the inside parts, within which elevates the penis up to the inside parts above; and this is not for reproduction, because their semen cannot reach the mother according to straightness, and it is a defect in movement.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation on him is that the patient be seated between your hands, and then extend the tip of his penis with your left hand with vigorous extraction, and cut the tip of the tip of the penis at the spot of the prepuce under the foreskin, just like a feather incision or if you do not touch any part, so that half of his skin resembles the tip of the penis and that the hook falls into the middle place according to how it proceeds.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And remember that in your operation for blood flow, what kinds of sweat may occur; pause you to him with this which cuts the blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capitulum 56.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Regarding albatard (a condition) that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the penis and inflammation, discoloration, and adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Sweats often occur in this albatard condition on the skin, and it is an indication of bodily harm.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and the other is not-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not-malignant, you must suspend with a fine thread and cut that place until all is gone; then apply a clot under it to the bottom in Egyptian ointment; near this, treat with this ointment called diafinicon until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if albatard is malignant, you should note the color, then proceed to apply cautery near the incision of it and its proportion.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	And if the albatard is in the prepuce at the tip of the penis for uncircumcised individuals, where one part of the albatard is inside the prepuce and another part is outside, then you must remove the albatard that is inside until it becomes consolidated; and then you treat the outside part, when you treat this period of the prepuce, it cannot be guaranteed that it will not be irritated.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And it also happens in the testicles and prepuce with discoloration and corruption, so you must remove everything that has already degraded or is about to degrade or that has already been corrupted; then draw a line over it close to this one made of honey, which is applied with flour from crushed poppy seeds and finely ground white sugar.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat that alongside the other treatment that makes it healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is an attempt at bloodletting due to inflammation, then apply a lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	A juvenile cautery is done in two positions at once, that is, during bloodletting and when the wound is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and all of it is destroyed in the process, then make an incision into the meat of the foreskin with a lead catheter so that the patient can urinate through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (this adherence happens only in cases where the foreskin is retracted, and circumcision is not required for this; over it there is no excision; and when adherence occurs due to a wound or abscess) you should make an incision until the pus is drained until the ligament dissolves and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it's difficult to drain those thoroughly, then make an incision by pricking some points on the head of the penis and foreskin, and this is what happens when the foreskin, being delicate, is pierced lightly due to its delicacy.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin thread, which already has been dipped in water to prevent it from sticking again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then treat with astringent substances until it heals completely.
Capitol .lvii.	Head 57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Regarding the purification of children and treatment for what happens in cases of circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution like other wounds: rather, it's specific to our operation and will, and more so in children than with others, it is necessary that we commit to the best operation and process that minimizes losses for health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	So, it's said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in certain free states, where they don't use these laws, but rather because we have acquired this knowledge through experimentation. The reason is that I've found that most artists and barbers use circumcision and purification on the penis and on testicles; they use ligament on the foreskin and excision on the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have tried all these methods and found that purification with forceps, with ligament on the foreskin that is similar to nail cleansing, prevents pus from spreading further, which separates two tunics in the foreskin, and leaves the inner part exposed, making it prone to other excisions and secure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in purification done with forceps, which is manual and used by butchers, it's not secure to make excisions at the extremity of the male member, as it can easily enter into his wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	And in operation with nail, even slightly, you would mar your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And a child's foreskin is short by nature, and cuts are made in such a way that it doesn't require purification, I've seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	The purification done with forceps and ligament on the foreskin, its goodness, an experiment that was revealed to me. The forceps have similar excisions in proportion, so their sharpness is as such like the sharpness they leave; and when you press your hand, there are two proportions of sharpness, cutting according to a comparison in one time; this results in compression of the foreskin into a figure containing the foreskin from all sides, with which no error occurs.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The first way of the operation is that you make the child stay longer if they are those I understand to be small, that you do nothing but tie the foreskin on the penis just there and let it be until another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make that joyous in every way possible for what is within your capability according to his understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then place that preparation among your servants so it's well organized, and don't use too many; hide the forceps in your hand or let them be on your person, so the child doesn't see those nor any other tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on the penis and blow into the foreskin, pulling it so that only the head of the penis is exposed, and then purify this as what's added to pus.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then place the designated spot on the foreskin doubled up, and pull out some pus from this to about half of a second ligament, and place your hand where the ligament is so that you have good control, making cuts between two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the foreskin slightly and stretch the head of the penis; and then let the pus flow out little by little, which is better; sprinkle with powder over it and on top of that lay cloth soaked in a hog's oil mixed with roasting grease in water; leave this like that for another day; treat this with an ointment until it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for purification is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the first end not be sharpened and the others be pointed, so that no part of the thumb is exposed, and let the length of the two sharp points be as long as the length of two penises equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in purification is when you easily remove all or part of the intrinsic foreskin, or you should make an incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Then you should extend that of your hour to your elbow in front of the knee of the patient and mark it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it at your elbow, then remove that up to the wrist and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has passed three days, and if the swelling remains, let the doctor examine that at the knee joint, then when you press into it so that the pustule under the skin softens, and excise it with ease, and incise it according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And watch over the knee joint, for not let that towards you, it belongs to him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then treat it with the powder that we have recommended in the chapter on powders of the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it has been incised to the bone and follows measurement, follow the sections above, do not let that belong to him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Capitol: 58
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction caused by gravel or a clot, or by blood or pus, and it resembles those we have described in the treatments for the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and the urine retention is due to gravel which is in the neck of the bladder, then you should have the patient lie on their back.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then have the patient place their feet on their knees and spread out their stomach from that point above their hips, and the patient should tighten their abdomen as much as they can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	And then the neck of the bladder is strengthened and the expulsion of the gravel to the rear parts occurs, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved according to what we have said and the reason becomes severe on the patient, then you should have them perform an extraction from him using a tool which is called a syringe; this is its form: It is made of silver and it is thin like a lion's claw, similar to a needle of ausel with thinness about as long as two palms, at whose tip there should be a fine tube.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of expelling urine through this is that you take the tip bent and bind it with wool or cloth for good adhesion; and insert the ends of the tip into the opening where the syringe was, and cut any excess from the fabric if there is a cause, but insert it into the cannula with force. And then push the syringe upwards and towards the patient's stomach.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And have the patient sit on their buttocks, and bathe the bladder and knee area in eucalyptus oil, olive oil, and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then push the syringe gently until it reaches the knee joint; and then fold the knee upwards towards the lower abdomen area; and then push the syringe inside; and then push that further until it reaches the bladder, and make sure the patient is facing forward without any obstruction, and do not follow this order if there is any twisting involved, but instead choose the position where it goes smoothly.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the tip gradually with the thread little by little, for urine soaks the thread.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then remove that and do treatment for urine using the syringe, don't stop doing this and continue using the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of bladder irrigation with celandine and similar instruments which should correspond to this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or there is a clot inside it, or if something constricts pus, and you want to distill waters and medicines in that area, then this must be done using an instrument called celandine. Here is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	If the tip of it is blocked, then the end becomes closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three parts: two on one side, just like that time.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning is the concave place where that which is inserted goes in, and according to the amount you push it, it adds up, so when any cause is pulled by that from the humidity, it is pulled out, and when it is expelled, it is also pulled towards it, and when it is expelled long, according to how celandine does it in battles at sea where naphtha is used.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	And if you want to prevent humidity in the bladder, insert the tip of celandine into the humidity, and pull that which is pushed towards the upper parts, for the humidity is pulled into the cavity of celandine.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the tip of celandine into the knee joint as we have recommended in the syringe; and then push that which you are pushing with it, for that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient should be facing forwards.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the delicate crus under which the bladder is inflamed, and that is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	It should be made of silver or lead, of which the tip resembles a small feather, and let him hold it inside them.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And take the bladder of motion, and place it in that humidity you wish to inflame in the bladder, then join that between two pieces of iron that are twice as long, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And insert the tip of the crus into the buttock.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And apply your hand to the bladder with the humidity in the descending structure within which the patient is lying, as that humidity has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of pork and make it into that circle; and puncture it throughout its roundness; then insert strong iron in those cuts, both when they are turned over; and add the circle as it is also added with fat, so that you place your hand on what you want from that humidity, soak it and water it.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And apply that in the instrument and do it like you did with the bladder, and place your hand within where the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Climax. LX (sixty).
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of bile.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division of the species of bile and its treatment with medicine, and the difference between bile produced in the intestines and bile produced in the bladder, and the signs of that one.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about bile during my operation, and sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the bile produced in the bladder is precisely that which is formed inside the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I am explaining that with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it's said that bile produced in the bladder mostly goes to children; and the signs of this are that urine that comes out of the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient rubs their buttocks, greases their anus, and is soon dressed; and on that way passes through the anus in mud from those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it's quick to heal children of that within which they have attained fourteen years; and healing is difficult in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	And among the young, it may be divided by this that is between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that from which bile is greater and healing is much quicker; if it's little, it's contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	And how do we reach the healing of that, we apply to the beginning of that which modifies the patient at the crus which extracts the entire opening which is in their intestines; for that opening sometimes prevents the flow of bile by means of inquiry for them.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And apply the patient to their feet and make them stand upright for themselves that bile may descend to the origin of the bladder, or escape from anywhere else or some movements.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And apply that censer between your hands prepared, and let the patient's hands be placed with their things, so that the entire bladder may be made to descend to the places they are lying.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then make sure that all of that is done.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	And if you feel the bile in the space, then you quickly cover it with a section over them.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not feel everything with your touch, then cover with oil one of your finger marks on the left hand, if the patient is an adult, or the middle finger if they are a full-grown young person, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And make sure the bile is inside them with your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that little one gradually into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And press on that with your finger, and force that out through their parts outside from the area where you have covered it.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the servant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another servant with their right hand to extend their thighs at their parts above, and with their other hand pull up the band which is on their thighs, in part of where the covering is done.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And apply a fat rod that this is the shape of:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and divide in it that which is between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle, before the left side of the buttock; and let the covering be on that bile and your finger is at the anus, and made transverse covering, so that the covering outside is wide and inside strengthened according to the amount that comes out of the bile towards them, but no greater, for strongly we hold your finger which is in the anus the bile must conform to this covering, and it does not get lost in its use.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is some bile which has angles and margins, because its passage out of it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that one which resembles lion dung, and is round, and it makes its passage quicker because of this.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	And if it's that one which has angles and edges, adjust in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not like this easily accessible, then cover over that one, or strengthen over that in a decent way, the tip of which is like a file on which you strengthen over the bile and do not escape from it; or insert your tool with curved end which is subtle.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot operate in that area, then widen the incision a bit more, and if you see blood flow, cut into it with a strong blade moistened with vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is bigger than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the bladder's opening, and proceed to cut on it; and afterward place a small object near there; and similarly if they have stones larger than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it's a large kidney stone, then the lack of knowledge is that you cut in an area that's too big, causing one of two things to happen to the patient: either it becomes stuck or obstructs their continuous urine production, so that the location isn't fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Take care in administering the expulsion within you until it's out, or design the surgery to fracture your patient with a saw inside, extracting that as pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in ground oil and water mixed, for the sake that the boil's pus will be drawn out.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And afterward have the patient lie down on their back, and do not move the stitch for at least one more day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And once that has been removed, wash the area with water and a bit of oil, and then treat it with ointment diafinicon and with ointment diabazilicon until it heals.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If pus and corrosive substances appear in the wound, adjust them and proceed to extract. If they resemble this when blood is frozen within the bladder (and this is known as bleeding urine), then intervene with what I've instructed in the wound and remove that blood, which if Roman causes the bladder to inflame the bladder and its decomposition.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with vinegar and water, salt, and against all types, with what you should apply to it for healing until it heals.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And throughout the entire healing period, handle both thighs and adjust the medicines that are applied to the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the scrotum, and urination is prohibited, then treat it with what I recommended beforehand until you reach an area; this area is often passed through during this treatment process and is recognized as an exit point. And I have mentioned this, and thus you should take a pointed iron needle, which has this form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	It has a triangular tip, sharp, fixed on the shaft.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a thread, tie it around the scrotum, leaving the stone there so that it doesn't return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the scrotum, piercing it in such a way that the needle reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the needle with your hand in that small stone, gradually piercing it until you make a hole from this side to the other; as soon as urine is relieved.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand against that which is hard from the stone at the exit point of the scrotum, when it's broken and opened by urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	And if this treatment doesn't suit for any cause that prevents that, then leave a thread with the stone, and another thread above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then cut into the stone in that scrotum between two threads.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract that (the stone).
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then remove the stitch and eliminate the frozen blood, which is formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It's not necessary to leave an iron thread with the stone, but only so that it doesn't return to the bladder; and the other thread above is for when the needle is removed close to the exit of the stone, then the infection returns to its place and affects the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, it's necessary when you have the needle above, that you raise the infection to the parts above, or if you should intervene again, and affects the wound like we've said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On removing a stone from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women occur less often.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	And if you see a stone among those, then treatment is difficult for her, and it's prohibited by various surgical methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman's uterus elongates the vagina.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you can't find a woman who knows how to give birth without showing it to the doctor when she's pregnant, or for women who have given birth.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you can't find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with her hands.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the exit point above stone in women is distant from the location of the stone, so you need a wave-like incision, and there's fear at that point.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	And if the need arises for this, then consider taking a pregnant doctor who knows, as few are found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	And if you are lacking that, then consult with a nearly subtle doctor, or present a woman midwife well versed in the work of women, or a woman who has part of this skill.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then make that presentation, and command the patient to do everything you instruct them, from the examination of their urine to the meal; this is because they should check if the woman is pregnant, then direct them to insert what she says into her husband's mouth and desire the urine.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find that, restrain it, place your hand on what she says, and then command her to lie down on that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If she is not pregnant, then command the midwife to insert what she says into the woman's womb and inquire about her urine, since place your left hand on the bladder, and compress that well.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you find that, then gradually make it so that she drains from the opening of the bladder to your hands in a position where her strength is entirely within you as it reaches the level of her hips.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And place your hand on that location of the woman's mouth at the level of her hips from whatever part she is standing and center the urine in that position; make sure the man's statement does not get contaminated by the urine when you restrain him.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be brief at mealtime; then place your hand on that section, and if you hear the urine, then adjust to the section according to the amount in which she knows that urine is being excreted from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the particles of urine are grains: those among them are few and large, sharp and rough, long and round, with a scent that is offensive.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you know how many species there are of yours for this reason that you will signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you wish to stimulate urination, adjust in the spot of the bladder and let her do this for an hour before removing the urine, then proceed with your operation when the urine is completely out.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare for yourself the tools that are mentioned in the extraction of urine in men, so you can be helped by them during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you wish to stimulate urine flow, and you know that the expulsion of urine occurs from the artery that is incised, then cover with powder on that spot and strengthen it with powdered and constricted descent; do not continue this. And let the urine out without forcing her, for should she force it, the woman will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And when the heat of the urine has diminished over several days and the place is cooled, then you should proceed with your operation when the urine is completely out.
Capitol lxii.	Title LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Title LXII: On positioning for hernia treatment.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia aqueducta is nothing but an addition of moisture in the white pipe, which contains the testicles and is called the pipe. It is named aqueduct hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it occurs in the proper scrotum which nature has provided for urine at the location of urine flow when already there is another urine. It's the conduit of the genetic between the white pipe that we have mentioned, and it is not this but rather a hernia.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to obstruction which affects the testicles, so it pours this material into those, and sometimes injuries occur from beating done on the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has various colors; the color of which can fade to yellow or become bloody, or reddish, or be black and sticky, or be watery white, and this is what is mostly seen.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows where this moisture accumulation occurs are: if it is in the white pipe that we have mentioned, then the swelling appears to extend from slightly long like a picture of urine, and the testicle appears, as the moisture contains it from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper scrotum, then the swelling appears at the location of urine flow and thus we estimate that there is another urine.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the conduit of the testicles and the white pipe, then you measure from that center.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want knowledge of the color of the moisture, then you express the color of the moisture in the swelling at the entrance that has a preceding shape; and according to what is established in the trace of the entrance, judge about what is inside.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And when we come to treating her with iron, then direct the patient that if this is possible for you, they should urinate and make their body full.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then have her lie down on her back for some reason or another, and place your hand under her wet sheets.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit on the left side of her, and command the attendant to stay behind her, who extends their hand between the two sides up to the testicle conduit and the belly button.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a lateral slice, divide the testicle conduit through the middle location longitudinally into the inner thigh.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the incision according to a straight line equal in distance from the line you should follow on the skin of the testicles, so it reaches into the white pipe containing.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scratch that, observe it, and take care so you don't go in too far; your scratching on what is scratched by him reaches down to where it hangs from urine more and you carefully inspect the scratching according to how much you can manage.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the bladder full of water through an ample hole, and remove all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two labia of the section with threads, and extend the bladder to those parts above; and do not touch the pubic bone encompassing the genital area, and cut the bladder in that manner as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And then cut it entirely or in pieces, especially its delicate part. If you do not examine the incision thoroughly, there is no certainty that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the patient moves during your operation, as when you have completed the section of the bladder, go back inside, and adjust the two lips of the pubic bone's genital canal with stitches, and treat that area as you would other wounds, until it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find that the patient is infected by another illness, then cut open the vessels that are under the suspensory ligament, and remove the body, and treat it in the way we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	And if the water is divided into two parts in each occasion, then know that these are hernias; therefore, cut that part according to what you have done in the other equally; and if it appears to be an operation, then you do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you cleanse the wound, and between the sections lay in wool soaked in oil or in rubbed oil; then place another piece of wool that you have soaked in vinegar and oil, spread this over the genitals and the belly's miracle; then place blankets folded on top of powders, and cover all of this with a material according to this shape:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then let there be holds for two blankets and have them filled with absorbent wool according to this resemblance; let their ends be placed where they are pressed against the buttocks or wet wool, let them be added to the structure in the crotch of the undergarments, one end takes up the anus inside the other, the other end goes to the opening of the thigh, and two ends on each thigh leave two others over the knees, and all the tension must be adjusted in the crotch of the undergarments.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery instead of surgery on that section. And you take the surgical knife and cut into the genital bone, and ignite it according to our recommendation until the white bladder containing the water is revealed, then you proceed with the cautery as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it resembles Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that bladder, and ignite until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the bladder with threads, scrape it with threads, and scrape it with a heated fine cautery; cut it according to what is possible while removing all of it; be careful not to let the water touch the flame.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and further from wound discharge than an operation in the section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	And if you find that an abscess forms after the operation or during the cautery, or wound discharge, then know how to treat whatever condition this causes for you, applying its treatment according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	And if the patient is weak, and does not anticipate a second operation due to its horror, then perform an incision according to what I recommend here; and it's when you're certified that, based on what we said about meanings, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	And you know to place the patient on some elevated ground, pierce the abscess at the lowest part of their body with a straight incision, and make the incision according to the length of their body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the incision be wide enough that you can drain all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place your hand on the spot and cover it with something soft, so that you can drain the remaining water.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat that area until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	And if the condition is against the removal of water at that time, you make that incision: this procedure is not done unless a white pannicol in the opening of the wound causes an issue and prevents the excretion of water. Therefore know to put into the wound a sponge or tool with which water from the hydrophilic glands is extracted, the shape of which should be preceded; or adjust on the pressure of the wound a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and is soothed approximately two or around those months; and when it's added, then it should be pierced according to that manner, so the patient will pass their days this way.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol .lxiii. (This likely refers to a section or chapter number within a larger work.)
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On excision regarding fatty hernias and their treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	And know that in the section regarding this hernia, there is a fear of losing nutrients through larger openings; so for me it seems to be better to relieve you and save you by that means.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I recall the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, state that abscesses occur in the bodies where the genitals are composed, and this is done by various causes: or due to intense acute overproduction which accumulates in the genitals, or through trauma.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it's the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and it is not found in their pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And light pain is from an absorbed abscess, of which the color is dark, and there is no fever in them.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some swellings occur due to the clogging of the veins, and by this swelling they already perceive the memory of it, or by swelling of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	What occurs due to the swelling of veins is known by the dispersal of pus when you press that area on your finger; and do not lift it until it touches.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	What occurs due to swelling of the vein does not disperse from them for any reason, you must press it on your finger.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this type section can be made cuts and not on other muscles; it's because you cut the nerve of the genitals, then place your hand close to the parts above them, and extract that from the white fat, and release the suspension of vessels, and tie them, and cut the pus sac that you release from every part of the parts of the hand.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	So if the hand is already under those hardened muscles, then you need to lift the hand and cut that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion between any of the fat tissues, or between what's in between the layers, then you need to release all that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	What if the origin of the flesh is in the area of the adhesion which is behind it, then you need to cut all that belongs to them, and lift the hand as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in oil and vinegar; and then treat that like any other treatment until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias caused by worms.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Worm-induced abscesses are enveloped by some kind of covering resembling a bud with softness around the testicles, making it difficult to perform physical exercise and ambulation on the affected body part.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this ailment, one should be wary as it is preceded by its memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, proceed to perform the operation there according to what I first described.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that you should have the patient lie on an elevated table; then pull down the suspensory ligaments to those parts left; and place your hand over the nerve of the genitals on your finger near the pubis; and keep all other assistants with you, and stretch them out as far as possible.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then, make a long, sharp incision through the middle section across the arteries in which you can see the veins.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then, cleanse all parts as we have said in extraction of nerves which are found in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert a needle with a double thread into those places where worms occur, and stitch it in the first location among them where worms are found, and stitch another place at the last of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then cut those in the middle location along the diagonal according to the length of the body, and extract what is added by the putrid and corrupted humidity.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with treatments for other wounds where you want to be healed by what falls off the blood vessels which are different than one or two nerves, which is not a bad thing.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	What if worms occur throughout the muscles, then you should have the testicles extracted or cauterized around them, because this affects the blood vessels, depriving them of all nourishment due to cutting of the blood vessels, until they are destroyed, or because it doesn't affect those in general.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernias.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that tends to stretch under the fat over the belly from parts of the abdominal muscles, so when protruding the intestines go into some of them.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture can be either of the fat or from within them, and it happens to these two types due to various causes: impact, or by jumping, or through shouting, or due to the influence of some heavy cause, or because of certain signs.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this, when it's due to an extension of the fat, is that it occurs gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and there is pus equal within the space where the fat compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of it is when it's due to a section in the fat, at the beginning causing sudden intense pain; and there is different pus apparent next to the nerve that seems near, and this occurs due to compression of the intestine, and his body towards the parts above the fat.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Some swellings are left on the surface of the intestine, and this is called intestinal hernia by the people.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some swellings are caused by wind, some swellings go into the intestinal hole and stay there, which is a great disease of the body. Some swellings cause bad pain that becomes much worse when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of these types of this disease, there is fear that should be avoided in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The method for performing the operation in this case is to command the patient to push the hernia back into its cavity with their hands at the inner parts of their cavity when it responds to returning, and then wrap it around their shoulder between your hands, and lift their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And when you have cut the cord which is tied to the testicles in their upper parts, and opened the testicles' tube all along; then make two incisions on that section according to your needs, for opening the section among those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if you have the quantity, as is possible from that, make a hole in it to get rid of whatever needs to be removed.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then remove those warts which are left of the testicles' cord, while it is uncovered, until you find the white hard lump in each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you proceed with your tool in the area where it severs the testicle, in the place between the white wart, which is left of the sperm duct, and secondly, remove it from each lump on that connection behind the penis.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then hold the testicles' cord in front of you with your hand, and extend the white wart on it while holding onto that with your left hand, lift the penis towards the wart in that part; command the assistant to hold the penis outwards from there and you dissolve the adhesion behind until completion.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And with your hands, ensure that there is no reason for the intestine enclosed in the hard white wart to be present.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause for it with him/her, then you peel that out from the belly.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with a thick thread of seven threads, and insert it through the middle of the wart, which is below the cord, which cuts the section; then make four holes at the ends of that within those seven threads, and bind some of them in the shape of a cross on any figure, in manner of an X; tie it to that wart from which we have said that the sperm duct comes out with strong force from two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of those threads, and tie them tightly in such a way that none of the blood vessels which nourish those can pass through any cause for fear that an abscess may occur from here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another tightly tied band three fingers away from the first one, further than the distance of his/her waist. And smooth out that piece of skin which is left of the wart, as much as the size of what was said, and cut the rest according to roundness, and remove the penis.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut into the remaining part of the sperm duct, for a section that flows with pus and health as we have described it in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; then apply the bandage as we have recommended (and a few warts of white wart are burned, which was mentioned nearby the location of his/her sexual organ's pus flow, where several bands are applied there) and smooth out the bandage so that it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If his/her healing is delayed, then let hot water be applied there, and place it on the area as we have said where it falls.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with another healing method for wounds until it heals.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	Regarding ventral hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, none has been seen to have been burned under the healing process of it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones would say that it is done in this way as we have described for the hernia at the anus; which means you tie up the blood vessels near that section towards it; then dry out the middle area around that, applying an abscess there where I do that, so that the blood vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Regarding the disorder that occurs in the gullets.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some instances of rupture occur in the gullets as we have said, and lift up the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not worry about any cause of hernias for the patient's health; and if they do worry about it, it is very little; return to that in all situations.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	And if the time lasts with that, there is a cut in the skin where it comes out of the hernia into the skin; and this happens due to the extension of the skin which is present in the gullets as we have said, which cause is that the skin extends, and then that area becomes inflamed and gets an abscess and lifts up.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for him/her is with a cautery as it was followed by the description of that.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some cases are cured with iron according to this method: and that the patient lies on his/her back between your hands, then dry up the area of the abscess rupture lifting it up for the width according to the size of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white wart that is below the cord, while it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the thread and place it on the prominent part of the wart, and press that onto the belly button area.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then pinch the two prominent areas at the end of the thread on the wart, and adjust one of those to stitch it with the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the extremity of the rib, do not pierce through the skin completely, nor stretch the muscle, nor cause any other harm as I know that should be avoided during intestinal hernia treatment.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then attend to that in the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the flesh, clean it out and restore the wound within so that it becomes consolidated; where the skin is pulled tight and the edge of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, which is close to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the treatment of softening of the chain of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Observations on the chain of the testicles in some men it softens due to this issue where the muscles that are within that area soften, and there is a need for vigilance regarding him.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one treating him to have him lie according to his side, and incise all the chain which softens over the natural chain; and then adjust two lips at the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, cut in the beginning the excess of the softened chain at three or four places and make a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then incise between the stitches; and treat for the healing of the other wounds so that he is healed and his muscles fall back in place.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but due to my duty as a physician I remember it here; and there's no need for me to recall this except for two reasons: one, when asked about someone who has undergone castration within the medical field, they must know how to treat them; and the second reason, we sometimes have to perform castrations on other animals like our young horses, as well as cows, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus I say that castration is done in two ways: either through atrophy, or through a rupture leading to necrosis.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	And in the case of that performed through atrophy, the way to perform the operation is that we cut off the animal in warm water so that his testicles soften and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those into your hand until they are resolved and do not leave any marks behind.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	And in the case of castration done through rupture and necrosis, you should have the animal and press on the chain of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then locate the suspensory ligament and incise over any muscle until two muscles are affected.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise those abscesses that you have found in each area.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not allow any cause over the muscles near the skin, but rather a subtle muscle which is under the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is done through atrophy as it leaves no effect on the testicles that make the animal want to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the wound so that it heals.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: the first is that he appears with a gap in the chain of testicles, it's like a male in which there are hairs.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	Some observations on that they pass urine where it is in the chain of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	And in the females it is a special case: that the female's sex on the scrotum is like two testicles of a man somewhat smaller at the front part, similar to a man's penis and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is for three types: two of men and one type of females.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And this involves incising those tightened muscles so that the blood flow of that area can escape, and then treat those with the treatment for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type of men who pass urine where it is in the chain of the testicles, there is no treatment or operation for him.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On coughing and prominent flesh due to female causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Persistent coughing is adjusted to natural causes until it subsides and requires regular observation; some observations show that in certain females, it expands like in men and extends during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, you should have the excess of coughing in your hand or on a stick and cut it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not conclude with cutting, especially at the base of the throat, because it may lead to bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat that in the treatment of wounds so that it heals.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Prominent flesh is the flesh that appears in pregnancy inside where it fills that space, and generally located as if in front (thus some of the firsts called this condition "tail tail"); therefore you should cut like how you would with coughing, and treat that so that it heals.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of erysipelas.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Erysipelas is when the skin of the female is not pierced, or it is a small bruise.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it's either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to a malady that preceded, and such happens either because of flesh not being well-adjusted or through the action of a subtle and thick humor.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it happens in the womb's region, or on the patient's ribs, or from excessive pus within them, or from pus below them. I forbid abortion and coitus and childbirth, and strongly forbid menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that comes from observing the pulse; if the illness is obvious, it's closer to the surface. More so if it isn't obvious, then you search for that under your fingers or along the body.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	More specifically if the pulse is due to subtle humor, and it's close to the two lips (of the patient), then you puncture and release that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place your fingers over the two lips of the patient's body, and then place your thumb and index finger under both breasts.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, with her legs extended, and you then extend both lips until that subtle humor is broken and the pulse becomes open.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil, place that over the cut area, and hold there throughout the day to prevent the incised place from healing.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	More specifically if the humor is thick and viscous, then you should cut that with a sharp blade or with a mint leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	More specifically if the illness is due to wind, then suspend it above a flame and cut that area.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the remedies that help stop the flow of pus and reduce inflammation, such as pepper, dragon's blood, and ashes, adjusted with a hen's egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead cannula so that the wound does not heal immediately.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that for several days and apply camphor to it.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then, using another method of healing for consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes events occur in the mother's womb for other parts of the body, and then you should cut according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	More specifically if it's due to pus formation, for the pus-filled lump within the mother, avoid using iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter seventy-three.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail inflammation, and red boils that occur in the uterus of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are the result of blood flowing through the veins in their locations continuously; and once old hemorrhoids occur, they recur in this manner.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already explained in the division of those types and their signs, as well as distinguishing those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, if hemorrhoids and boils are in the womb area and do not appear to cause discomfort, then there is no treatment with iron for these.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	And those that are in the openings of the womb on which you feel a sensation, are those that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you should have the woman in a state of cleanliness and wash her, then spread out flax or with hard cloth on her underparts, and cut those areas.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then apply the powders that reduce the flow of pus from one of the internal powders to inflammation; such as pepper and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then soak her feet for an hour, and then have that placed in hot water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the pus flow persists, then make that person drink a decoction of sumac and decoctions from elderflowers and marigolds and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of ash, mix that with honey and wine to make it thick, and apply this as a poultice on her back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the inflammation is gone, then it's good; otherwise, make it stick with two plasters, and on the nipples do scraping.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in the juice of comfrey or in the juice of arnical or in vinegar mixed with water, and make it stick to the area. And then treat that place with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	And if the skin is hard to look at, then you should cut that which makes your impression of it according to what I've said about boil equalization.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat that until it's healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Regarding accidental perforation in the womb.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various types of abscesses that occur in the womb, such as pus formation, kidney stone abscess, ulcers, swelling, menorrhagia, drainage, boils, swellings, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already explained these diseases and their types along with their symptoms and treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And you should know that I explained in this treatise about the surgical treatment of abscesses that are in the womb when they are due to healthy conditions, and if you want to know how the operation is performed with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	So consider if the pain from the abscess at its beginning is sharp to touch and feels slimy and feverish, sometimes it turns red and if you feel something over it, then there's no need for you to suspect a perforation in it, treat that with what helps towards maturation until the intensity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then carve out the female over a groove that has two grooves; and recline on her back and adjust her feet to the beginning of the belly, and her thighs spread out, and place her hands with their elbows, and tie them firmly in such a way as is convenient.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then let the midwife follow along the right side and apply the tool to where it has opened the mother's aperture, which shape will come about in those causes that will happen nearby.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this tool, fix it at the level of the mother's opening in the female, so that what enters from the tool does not exceed the mother's opening and leads down the thigh.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the tool is larger than the mother's opening, then you must place powders on the texture of the mother's opening so that it prevents all instruments from entering the mother's opening.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should place the substance that moves in the tool slightly above and ensure that the administrator holds the tool and rotates the substance until it opens the mother's aperture.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when you feel the contractions, and it is touched by hand and becomes strong and wet, then you should dry that which you must place on the head of them with a damp cloth.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the sweating has stopped, then you should place on the wound a poultice submerged in rubbing oil or castor oil containing some medicinal properties; and place the foot on the spot at the mother's opening.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And remove the mother and over the navel, place clean woolen cloth submerged in water in which are boiled maroons.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it for about two days with grease that fits into such an extent that it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some sores are washed by the mother and the wound with vinegar that is mixed with water and honey, and then returns to the water in which iris root or horse chestnut is boiled, and then returns to the grease.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is inside the pregnant mother's abdomen, then you should refrain from treating her with iron, instead treat it according to what we have said in this section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Title: 75
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to properly medicate the fetus when it deviates from a natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is for the midwife to understand the natural figure of labor when it occurs through signs on her. When you see a pregnant woman being squeezed from all sides and she wants to smell the air, and this gets heated by what happens during labor, and promotes fetal expulsion, then you know that this part is according to the natural figure, and it is the expulsion of him over his head, and the second one either hanging or suspended under the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you see those signs, then you should understand that the belly of her is compressed by itself so that the fetus descends lightly as when it goes over its head, make the second one to do this for her, and wash off those excesses with good hygiene.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	That which is another like this part is not natural and unmanageable, when the fetus expels over its feet and her body is expelled in front of her head and her feet, and one hand of her, or at her foot., or has her head expelled and her hand, or at her belly, and it is forcibly turned on its neck, seeming like unmanageable figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is for the midwife to be knowledgeable and discerning in all these matters, so as to avoid error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing all the figures of these, and which means are in them by themselves to be interpreted and what state they should be on.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the labor is expelled over its head through natural expeditiousness, and that is vigorous on the woman and made to her difficult part, and wears out her strength, then let her do this, or what pregnant women should do for her, and evaporates her sweat with fennel seeds and with wet oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then let the midwife insert her hand between her buttocks and small opening towards the second one, or dry that with her elbow under where runs whatever has moisture in it.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And presses the belly of the pregnant woman so that the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it does not descend, then you should have the pregnant woman fumigated with garlic and fennel oil.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then instruct her to have a hot bath and make her sneeze with mustard; and open her mouth and her nose for an hour, so that the fetus will come out quickly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both parts of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then you should reduce those gradually to facilitate small expulsion little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If it does not respond to the treatment, then place the pregnant woman on a bench and lift her feet up, and move the bench over the ground; and make sure the pregnant woman is held so she doesn't fall from the shaking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the parts are not being turned inside out and the fetus is being expelled, then insert those and extract the membranes of the fetus or tie the belly to her hand with a cloth and extract that in equality, so that it will come out quickly.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	In the embryo's development over their feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus moves on their feet, then you should push those towards it, and gradually make the movement of the fetus smaller, and adjust that position, and take one of its feet and spread those slightly at a time.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When the head is situated inside the thighs, then you command it to be expelled, and make it vomit under control, which would be a natural process if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if the expulsion is not happening as planned, then you gradually return the fetus back inside until it takes on a natural position, where at that point it would naturally be expelled more easily through the next stage of delivery.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if we are prohibited from using all that we have recommended, then take up the bandage of silk and of dissolved gum, and crush it all in the mortar with good pounding, and apply a line at the woman's abdomen, under her belly button, at the lower part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then have that catheter be immersed in hot water so that it reaches the hips.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you notice the parts around the patient start to harden, then have them undergo a mild fumigation with myrtle and keep that treatment for them.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And after the one-hour fumigation, then have them sit on a stool, and make her sneeze and extend her mouth, remove from that position, and press lightly on the lower part of her belly, so that at some point it would naturally be expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Positioning of the fetus in the patient's pelvis and chest.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus enters in this manner, then you guide her hips little by little; and let the woman stand on her head, and place her feet below, and those should be stretched out over the bed, and ensure her hips.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And gradually press on the patient's abdomen little by little, and then remove what causes her feet to be below the armpits once everything is prepared for the lower part of that area.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not expelled, then take her feet and vigorously move those, and gradually press on what's above the hips little by little until the fetus can reach the upper parts through those positions.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then guide her hips and make the fetus smaller little by little, and command the woman to push until the fetus is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Position of the fetus hanging diagonally with one of its hips.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Guide her in the reduction of her hand, but if you cannot reduce that, then lift the woman and let it go.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it cannot go on its own, then have her lie down on the bed, and vigorously move her thighs in a shaking motion, and administer remedies that I mention and recommend for fomentations.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth has come about, then have her sit on a stool, and study over the reduction of her hand, and make the fetus take on a natural position, and make her sneeze and command her to push herself until it is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Position of the fetus hanging over the head, spreading her hips, and the skin around her is two times that of her mother's.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Make sure the midwife holds the head of the fetus and gradually rotate it little by little, so that it becomes easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it's equalized, and once it is made even, then pause on her chest with that which we have recommended using oil and fomentations.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command her to push little by little, and when you've done that, have her sit on a stool and command her to lean over to the right side of her stomach, and then command her to push; and make her sneeze under control.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Examination of the prepared fetus from the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the horror of the mother occurs according to this method, consider it, and then you should immerse the second in your thumb until the humidity is evacuated.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is hanging on her face and neck, then you should immerse that of the belly, so that it's not held back and suffocates.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus towards the parts inside until you guide that according to what's considered, and command the woman to push herself several times, and it would be expelled in a shorter delivery if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Examination of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins usually occur naturally, and some may take three or four times, but this is unusual and quite rare; most of these are due to natural causes, and not living organisms.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Count them, whether they are multiply, one second, and separated by the umbilical cord, distinguishing these in each of their ligaments. Some may be expelled as if it's a fetus through natural birth more easily, and others may be expelled as if it's not possible to prevent this way that we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them are difficult, you should proceed with the childbirth and ensure that it's like what we've said about the non-natural figures, then treat these as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and performs as it facilitates and with subtlety, and in delay, being guided according to every figure according to what she has been prepared for by her expertise leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembering that which forms in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some swellings are formed in the majority one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and you should verify that a woman who aborts yields one, and another ten formed ones, which is caused by measurement of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this is covered in the science of midwifery where they judge by what she bears a resemblance to that, and thus hold themselves to that which covers it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Title: 76
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Regarding the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus with what we have discussed in the division of medicine and it does not depart immediately, then decide whether to use an operation with your hand, you must consider if the woman is healthy by nature and not at risk from some accidents through which her loss might occur.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then consider that the woman is laid on her back over a mattress, and that her head is tilted inwards and her thighs are raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold that from both sides or be tied on the mattress so that the woman's body does not extend beyond the fetus extraction.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you moisten the mother's mouth with oil, salt water, and mustard and fennel seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then anoint the midwife's hand with those oils and mustard, and insert her hand in the woman, and position it at the location where she will find the umbilical cord in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And it is convenient in this: then consider if the fetus is prepared that descending on its head, then you place the umbilical cords at his heels, or at his neck, or in his mouth, or in his palate, or leave him with his chin, or at his sternum, or in the locations near his ribs, or leave the flanks.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	And if the descent is on his feet, then at the navel, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And consider that the umbilical cord is in her right hand, hold the curvature of him at that spot which is between the last fingers of her left hand, and insert her hand comfortably and place the umbilical cord in one of those locations we mentioned, so that it reaches to the lowest point.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then hold and place it at the position of him again, or another one if necessary, so that there is equal traction, and not extension according to his straightness only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And may the effort be throughout the entire part, so that his expulsion is as relieved as it is done in teeth during their extraction.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And consider in him what is between them that the extension may be softened; and if any part of him is being held back, then you must consider that the midwife should oil some of her fingers with oil and insert those expertly and revolve in the oil that is being held back.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the part of the fetus is removed, then you should place the umbilical cords at that spot which is more inside; and do this until all the fetus is removed.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	And if the hand is inserted in front of the other one, and it's not possible to reduce that by compressing him, then you should consider wrapping a cloth around that; and extract that until all is removed, and incise it or at the junction of her hand or on her side.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do this also with the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the fetus's head is large, or it happens by compression during extraction, or water is found in his head, then you should insert between her fingers a thorned rod and cut open the head and drain the water, or discover that with an instrument which is called "the pick", whose shape will resemble the shapes of the other tools near this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do this if the fetus is large by nature: then you must consider piercing that with hemp, or take that as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is already extracted and compressed at the sternum, then it must be cut open until the moisture in his feet is dispersed.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	And if there's no complication, or it doesn't require extraction, then you should cut the head as soon as that suits you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the contents of the belly are ruptured or in his hydrocele, then you must perforate that where there's moisture in him.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the fetus is above his feet, then the traction of him is slight and the direction of him towards the mother's mouth is slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if it's compressed in the belly and feet, then you must extract that with cloth which will envelop your hand, and cut open the belly and feet until there flows what is within those.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	And if the other limbs remain and return the head, then the midwife inserts her right hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, then she inserts her hand in the nostril area, and around that the head, and pulls him with her hands into the mother's mouth, and then she inserts one or two umbilical cords, and pulls him towards those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is reddened by an abscess, in which case she should not be excessively heated; first prepare to cool her, then administer an infusion of fatty cold substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply bandages; and continue with treatments that soothe and moisturize the patient.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the injury is on his side, then ideally, it should be stitched up; and what we have said should be administered in a living wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be soaked in bandages, and removed afterwards.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And make sure to remove any cause from the inside during the second stage.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then apply what we have said about the treatment in the abscesses that occur from the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is bleeding, then apply in damp water and proceed with the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman with a dead fetus in her belly, and another fire was started near that, and the other fire was for the dead fetus.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	A long time ago an abscess occurred in her abdomen; and it became inflated inside that servant's belly, and they began to sweat.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat her, and treated her for a long time, but the disease did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied some strong-sticking bandages to her and immersed her in water several times, and after passing through these days, I immersed her in another time; and I was very surprised, because there is no bone inside.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I heated the wound and removed bone matter from her, the woman existing in such a disposition of her intestines, and I had already seen this method for such a long time, she began to sweat slightly.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not find it strange, but rather that there is knowledge and assistance in this for the doctor to administer treatment to heal.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	About the forms of the tools necessary to remove the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of vomiting in which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strengthener in which they equalize the free ones, to which equality two vomits at the ends of two fetuses.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But this vomit should be made with a more subtle instrument of squeezing, and done either from bamboo or cane.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of any rod is two fingers and the edge of each side is one finger, and the length of each is a hand and half; and in the middle place of two rods are two adjustments for those wooden sticks which are already tightened, from which the length is about a palm and slightly more, and the width of each is equal to two fingers, or slightly less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two attachments should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that they open when you turn those prescribed vomits.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form resembling that, more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made from bamboo or cane according to the similarity of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the end of it are two attachments like this, and the length of those attachments is about a hand, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with those, then you should place the woman on her back with her feet hanging down, open that which is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the tool as you would do with scissors, evenly according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mother's mouth within which the meter does what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vomiting that was said by the ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of the pusher in which the fetus is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of the助手 (assistant) in which the large head is turned.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it resembles forceps with teeth at the end like this, sometimes, and some operations are done long like this according to forceps in this form, like this, which has teeth like those of a prong where they are dipped and turned.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The form for the助手 (assistant) few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The form of a hook having one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The form of a hook having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of forceps in which the teeth are closed on that where the head of the fetus is turned.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The form of a spatula having two ends, in which the head is severed:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The form of two spatulas laid out:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are practiced, and when you have multiplied the species of them and they are prepared by the artists, as much lighter for your operation and more appropriate do you find men according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not use those instruments if you can help it, for the need of those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	About extracting the second one.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second one is retained, you should give birth to it, then order that the mother retain her breath, and make her sneeze in the condition, and strengthen your hand on the mouth of her and on her nostrils, and if she does so outwardly, good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a needle and make a puncture in the cover through which you hold onto a spoonful of herbs to moisten the mother's mouth, like a calamus and rudis and anethum and camomilla, sciscidos arabic and cassia lignea and santua.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the spoon, and hold that above the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place an aloe vera catheter in the mother's mouth, and have that inside so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And make her sneeze as we have instructed, and the second one out comes with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	Let this treatment continue until it is effective if you do not find any improvement, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in saffron oil or in a hyssop extract, and immerse that into her stomach while you encourage it out, and take the second one as soon as possible, and when you have found that, then take it slowly by small amounts if it sticks to the mother's stomach. Then put your hand in according to what we advised, and when you find the second one, extract it little by little according to correctness so that the mother does not fall back on her vomiting forcefully.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	When this process makes her feel relieved in both her right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And adjust the amount of vomiting, so that she obeys it and avoids sticking to anything.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended this treatment with sneezing and using herbs in the spoon.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If it is not relieved by all the causes we have recommended, then keep in mind not to overdo it with repetition, but rather observe that what leaves the patient's body goes into her thigh, and apply a balm and tetrapharmakon; for which this will soften that around several days and dissolve and be expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it heals, it raises bad odor to the head and stomach, and this makes the illness disappear; then observe that they should be given sub-vapor treatments and things suitable for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	As with the ancients, these sub-vapor treatments involve using ash from burnt myrtle and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the device for which the woman is sub-vaporized must prevent the retention of her periods and secondarily, that of the afterbirth:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of wood or reed.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the subtle end is placed in the stomach while the wider part is above the fire, and the sub-vapor treatment should be placed over the flames of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And have that inside so that this vapor treatment is consumed and repeat another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Regarding the cure of an unruptured infant anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The child is in distress and its anus has not ruptured, which is small and full.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	So observe the midwife that she punctures according to her instruction that small anus; and if not, puncture that with a sharp needle, and make sure it doesn't touch the wound.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place over that wool soaked in vinegar and oil; and then treat that with grease so that it stays moist.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear it is full, then place an indwelling catheter for a few days, and leave it as long as the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if there is constipation in the anus due to inflammation or abscess; then observe that this consolidation should be undermined and treated with what we have said about treatment and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Regarding the cure of fistulas that occur within you.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the lower passage, causing pus and coarseness are those which develop near or outside the anus or in the space of one of the passages.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or marks.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling has hardened and is corroded by the watery white humidity or pustulation, sometimes some occurrences are of these fistulas penetrating them.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Those that penetrate are known by what leaves them through excretion and wind release; and some of those cause illness in excretion, and forcefully causes the departure of worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas occur in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some of those penetrate into the junction of the thigh, and into the socket of the buttocks.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in that where the known penetrable fistula enters into the anus and does not penetrate, it is that you insert your instruction endic into the anus, and immerse a subtle tip of reed or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is tortuosity in that, then immerse a subtle lead or horsehair tip into it until you feel the hair or the lead in your instruction.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all nor process any cause of expulsion or worms or wind as we have said, then understand it is non penetrable, and proceed with the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then it signifies urine discharge from that and prohibition of which means that the place where medicine is applied should be consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or inside the bone causing pain in the circulation, then this is a sign that the attack has entered here if there is not a blockage inside the bone and causing pain in the circulation at the start; and that it flows constantly over time; and that such medicine isn't effective, nor does it harden through application.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas that penetrate it isn't a cure for everything, and the cure of those is hard work and diligence on the part of medical surgeons upon which they rely.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And in that one that isn't penetrating and isn't old, healing with iron is expected according to what I will tell you, and this which I already have and approve.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that I place you between their hands under their chest, the thighs are inclined towards your belly, and introduce the lead or mercury if there's a blockage in the fistula, so you know where the attack penetrates.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that is your belly around the kidneys, then cover what you instructed to be done in the kidney area.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the pain is in your instruction it has already naturally revealed itself penetrating, then whatever you feel between your instructions and that ulcer or flesh, then you will certainly know that this is penetrating; and from then on do not work on that area, because there isn't a cure for it, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, others might say that certain things are healthy in some people's cases.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And concerning the treatment for which youth is expected in you, it's that you use a delicate cauterizing flame according to the size of the fistula, as previously described, and introduce this flame into the fistula until it reaches around the kidneys; then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all those muscles attached to the fistulated areas resemble feathers from the wing.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that with warm wraps in which all those muscles that you've attached can heal, and also treat that with medicines applied to the flesh generating and hardening it. If it is healed, well then it's good; and if not, then this isn't healing within a reasonable time for another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the pain enters and doesn't penetrate into your instruction which is in the anus, between this and the soft flesh or ulcer that's gradually appearing, and there's an opening in the fistula where it affects the surface of the belly-button, then dry out the belly-button from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if it dries up, and it's inside the fistula until the drying reaches the spot where the end of the pain penetrates, and the pain is relieved and disappears.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then make those fistulated muscles resemble the reed of an old bird and don't damage any part of this, as there's no cause for that.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if there's a flow of pus that comes between you and your operation when these muscles are present, then let the amount be moderate and with the least pus use a smaller instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine; one should apply fire to those pus accumulations: this is the healing of those attached muscles, and eradication of pus through drying up of moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat that with warm wraps or in a slightly moistened state until the affected area gets better, and then from there treat this wound with hard flesh medicines generating and hardening it.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And for these medicines which contain tightening and drying effects; once this is done, it's restored and already healed, you don't fear repetition.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the fistula has already penetrated into the prostate of the anus and is extended from your body's surface, then you introduce your instruction into the anus and inquire about this.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And thus if there are cents and between you and it is gradually turning into flesh or flesh, and it's advancing towards penetration, then this isn't an operation in you but rather according to the path of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	That cause can be administered in him in one of three ways: or to cauterize that as we have said; or to dry up that until you achieve the cavity's recovery so that it is possible for you to introduce those and the healing progresses; do not interfere with the drying process so that you don't enter the containing the kidney, and let your intention be on the belly's return in the passage of sex; then treat that with what we said where strength is necessary for health; or extend that gradually and drain the pus that dries up inside close to the anus, as we have said, or through pain or with another sharp instrument, then dry those fistulated muscles which are in the drying area until you can pierce it; then exert yourself to restore the entire wound with drying, and if there's pus above not being consolidated, and continues the opened fistula at the entrance of the anus, only a little pus flows from the belly.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And some times the fistula ends according to this method: when you introduce the pain into the fistula, and it's near the anus on the surface of the body in the belly button area and around the anus, then it takes on the appearance of a perforated end like a needle piercing during the preparation of veins in this manner:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And introduce into that fil wrapped in filaments or around these; and then introduce pain into the filament inside the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If it penetrates the margin of the buttocks towards the inside, then you remove the feces from that track as long as you insert your finger into the anus; and you extract the end of the feces and adjust both ends at once, strengthening each one, and leave this for a day or two. And when more fecal matter penetrates into the flesh, strengthen it in the place where those tissues are penetrated by fecal matter which is between the two ends of the feces that fit together.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And take care of the wound once it has been consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the fistula openings are not penetrating, then make them penetrate in whatever manner you have prepared, but rather than being inside the preon, which is not for you to do this so as not to damage the muscle; and take care of it once it has been healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The way to shape the spine-like thing which is split by the fistula: make its edge sharp and the other part blunt, so as not to damage what isn't necessary, just like that.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Regarding stitching hemorrhoids in which there is bleeding during their introduction.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids come in two ways; some are like charcoal in the buttocks, or they resemble that which is like fat of raisin.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And those are small and large ones, and the bleeding from them varies over time and is constant, it's dirt, and it's inside the buttocks, and at their ends.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that are inside the buttocks are according to the few wet conditions, of which there is yellow water or a little blood in continuous body color, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment of that one inside the buttocks is to command the patient to lie down and squeeze until the buttock swells and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then take care of it yourself and use your fingers or whatever you have those at your disposal, and then proceed to apply those forces.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the nails are not at those due to their moisture and softness, then take them with a hard cloth or with cotton or wool flannel, remove those with your fingers, then apply that to each of them near the introduction, so they replace that instead of cautery; or cauterize them according to what is explained in the chapter on how to perform a cautery.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And take care of those with the other treatment once they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the buttock does not allow evacuation, then anesthetize the patient with an injection of a small bite, and wash them with what is in the buttocks that allows for slight expulsion when pressing on the patient.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the buttocks, then the cause is minor, so take care of them with your fingers, or take care of them with a nail, apply force to them, and then take care of them with what we have said once they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And the one who feels pain during introduction, then understand that you should administer stitching to them according to this manner: take wrapped thread and insert it into the needle and proceed to remove hemorrhoids from their sides, and make the hemorrhoid penetrate through the needle on the other part, and enclose both ends of the thread around the side but leave the needle's width; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong tension, then take away the thread and pull out the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and leave one without tying it, so that the excess blood can flow from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place over the buttocks a cloth soaked in rose oil or on wadding; and place that over the buttock and command the patient to lie there.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that so it fits; and when healed, treat those with balm or another treatment until they are cured.
De curacio de fistulas.	Regarding the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Mottos that occur result from the excision of a cut or due to constriction in nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they have aged and are not useful in that medicine, then understand that you should squeeze those with the tip of the spine or with your finger so that they become wet, and cleanse them from the pus above which prohibits their consolidation; and take care of those once they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And you should stop those with a strong amount of pus, the first time when they bleed and become irritated; and take care of those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Regarding the treatment of abscesses, this is the key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Understand that abscess formation is the key, and not just notice red spots resembling a piece of a needle throughout the body, and especially on those parts below the feet and hands, and for those pains you should apply heat.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And understand that what is introduced into the circulation of the needle should be inserted, and it should be kept with the scissors or with tweezers, and its root should be removed; and then take care of that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize it according to what was explained in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Veruca is a small prominent pimple-like ulcerated round spot on the surface of the body, and ulcers are common in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for this is to stretch and incise that area, or to tighten that area with a cord or inside a bag.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize this, as we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And the inversions and non-inversions are eradicated using the tool I directed.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A flea bite is a small prominence or ulcerous swelling on the body surface that moves around inside it. When one touches this, it feels like being bitten by a flea, and it occurs around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for this is that you take a pipette from frog blood or chicken's heart blood, and it should be strong. Place this over the flea bite inside the circle of your fingers; then move your hand inside the pipette as to incise where it feels like being in the circuit of the flea, and place this under the skin in the area of the bite, and eradicate the flea from its nest.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a pipette made of horn or iron according to this method:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Take the part above the pipette tube that holds subtlety, silently (it means not perforated), wrapped around it such that its appearance is erased and the movement of that thing.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the flea as was mentioned in the section on cauterization of thyme in the head of the cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Regarding the form of the instruments that are used to give baptism.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some administrations give baptism using silver or tin or melted horn or hammered metal; some are done with small and large instruments according to those used for administration, so that the one being administered is small during the treatment of small children; and from those whose buttocks are firm or painful, the baptisms of these should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of the large and few baptism:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The mouth of the pipette above where the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and there's the separation towards which the bag is tied, so it happens in that way.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of this bag, which enters the anus, should be silent (meaning not open) with a slight bend; and in one side of its waist there are two teeth, and on the other side one tooth, and the width of the tooth according to the thickness of the rays, being wider ones a little larger.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag in which the medicines from bladder of beast or sheep skin are placed, be as long as your palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be pierced with teeth like those that are twisted; and if the space between the teeth is as large as what was mentioned.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And insert into those teeth a thick piece of raw honey wax that is as wide as ten fingers or approximately that size; adjust it to that bag; and when the bag is placed in him, stretch it along the length of the baptism between two points with strong constriction, and baptize each tooth: The quality of baptizing with this is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and remember not to make too much or too little wax.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And let the patient lie on his back, elevate their feet at this height and place them on someone or a stool; and apply the tip of the cautery with oil or with hen's egg white or with fennel or garlic jelly; and insert that into the anus with ease, then have the administrator hold the bag and squeeze that in two parts with force so that everything from the baptism is evacuated inside the intestine; and remove the baptism and let the patient lift their feet to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine causes him to urinate forcefully, use as much as possible; and if he sleeps with that for the whole night, it is better later in adolescence.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	And if you baptize that in the stomach troubles and the patient's urination, then you iterate the cautery until he is cured.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or boils in the anus, then let the baptism be subtle and twisted, like the baptisms of those who are baptized as children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Regarding the treatment of the sores.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of the treatment of the sores that it suited the free, and I say this way too about their treatment with me and medicines according to his capacity.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	So I say that sores are diversified according to what type of sores they are made and according to the place where the spots attack.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which small stones are made to cause sores can be as follows such as stone formation in bile, or incision of space or vein, or hitting with a spear, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or from those causing stone-like causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	The sores that are in the body parts can be as follows such as a head sore, or on the neck, or the feet, or the belly, and so on with those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend treating some sores by pausing this reasoning and principle about the others.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I begin with simple head sores, for which the recall of combined ones will come at the beginning of the next chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	When an ailment occurs in the head causing simple pain and not a fracture, then consider: if it's due to pressure of phlegm or similar, and has been drinking the medicine only and is severe head pain and you fear for that patient's possible formation of pus, then you drain and bleed the cephalic region immediately; don't delay this treatment. And extract from under the wound according to the quantity of his virtue if not any cause forbids bleeding, especially if the pus that comes out of the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And do the bleeding in the opposite part of the afflicted area; and watch over the patient for fullness, excesses of food and heavy meals.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	And if there are any prohibitions due to the diminution of food, then reduce the diet and do not allow meat or drink.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place over the illness, if it happens that there's pus, apply a hot compress in olive oil rubbed or in a drink where is a止血 agent.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	And if you are sure of the pus formation, then place over the illness, if it's fresh at their wound and the air has not changed that powder which I would recommend to apply slightly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed, then place on some ointment inside until it heals.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the illness is large or due to inflammation and swelling, and her lips are not fitting with pins, then adjust those according to how I would recommend for their suture.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And if the illness has already uncovered from the bone and flesh, and it's not retention of her but just a small suspension, then incise that and treat the illness with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the wound. Command the patient to eat foods that are good for them: caps and meats cooked well with spices, until they are done.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find decomposition in the wound and it doesn't stick to the bone, then you need to incise all that pus and extract it, and treat that area.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	And if in these illnesses blood flow from an artery or vein might occur, and it's not removed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery. If you find that unincised part, then you need to incise that with a spatula or tie it; and if it is necessary that what we said does not agree, then you cauterize until the blood flow is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these illnesses are simple and small, then their cause is insignificant; sprinkle this powder over them, let that powder solidify before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of this powder is as follows: take olive oil from bees' part one, dragon blood from the roots part two, and non-extinguished ash parts three; mix it all thoroughly and sift it, let that powder fill the wound, and bind well inside so that when applied over that area sticks and coagulates with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then bind that with powder and let it rest, do not move it while still like this until the pus does not form, ensure that the medicine is not eradicated from your body until it heals.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And some times do this alone with a cautery, when you don't have beeswax and dragon root available.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical procedure is done for large illnesses when it's necessary to lay that on them and they are treated, those illnesses recently with their blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially in summer time, then it's not understandable to place this powder in its usual position, but rather treat those with what we've said before, by placing some better ointments on them or sprinkle that onto those powders from wheat flour mixed with water and honey until they turn into a paste; then continue treating those with another cure until they heal.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if there's an injury in the bone fracture and it's small, then you extract that with your hand.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	I would prescribe the treatment for skull fractures in what is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	And for illnesses of the throat.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	And if illness occurs in the throat, there is no difference in treatment compared to a simple illness of the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	And if the nerves in the throat have been incised or an artery, then if it's nerves, there is no concern with their digestion, but avoid treating them with substances that cause strong embalming effects, like garlic and others similar to asafetida which are harmful to nerves and constrict those.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply anything to the illness for any reason because that substance of nerves is cold and the continuation of it is towards the brain, which is the pus essence of all body parts.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that which is treated with mild medicines, like washing with boiled water or oil rubbed or un-rubbed, when it's washed with boiled water and the other minor sores are treated according to this manner, then with ointments moistened.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	And if the illness is large, then administer suture or tighten her lips, and then treat that with powders until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	And if the illness has depth or occurs at the lower part of pus formation, then puncture that in the most deeply affected area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If in the wound already an artery has been incised and blood flow is achieved, then separate or dry that, bind it, or cauterize that if necessity prompts you to do so at this point.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If you have incised the tendons of the Achilles tendon or all of it, and if veins in the neck are saved, then adjust the edges of the sutured chain over the tendon shaft of the Achilles tendon without touching that; flatten that and reduce that to its natural shape, and strengthen that with a decent tension, and let that heal for several days; and treat that with ointments where there is stiffness and inflammation until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has already penetrated into bone, then puncture that. If there are fragments of bone within it, extract all those you can from them; and for what does not belong to it, let this remain inside until the wound heals, then separate it so that the healing is smooth.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over that the powder which is recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If in the wound there is a fistula, then treat that with what comes to mind as close to its head part.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From neck or face wounds that occur between the shoulders and is made in the space, on ribs or on lungs or on bones or on cheeks.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it's a wound from a spear or rib, and you gauge the depth for him, then consider if there is wind passing through the patient when he coughs; then know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth in him and the wound is recent on his blood vessel, then place in him some first aid powder, without tightening that so as not to retain the blood at the depth of him and let it return to the heart without affecting the patient, rather place an attractive ointment in him, and withdraw that twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not available to you, then place a little over in the wound's opening so that it sucks whatever moisture there is; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is adjusted inside flows.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If from the wound three days or more have passed and no convulsions, heart failure nor constriction of blood flow occur in the patient, then you will know that the wound is saved; and then treat it with rest and other good treatments until it heals.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of him is excused, and it has been open for all this time, then you will know that a fistula has already been formed; treat that according to its head.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is due to incision in bone or rib and it is simple on the surface of the foot or chest, then treat that with what precedes suture, if it's large, or with powder if it's small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has already penetrated into bone and you've incised bones from him, then hold the wound open to extract those bones if they're separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separate, then let them heal inside until the wound heals, making the extraction of them smooth.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other injuries to wounds in other limbs during treatment is the continuation of what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Regarding abdominal wounds.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The sickness that occurs in the abdomen is either large, or small, or intermittent.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For the large ones, sometimes it involves the intestine or nerves of the intestine, so an intervention on them and their suture should be more forceful and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And for the small disruptions are made difficult by another manner, and I know that their reduction is more difficult, if you don't take care of their intervention in their place immediately after it opens up and gets bigger because of the surrounding tissue making it hard to operate on.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is intermittent, where there's no difficulty in reducing the intestine as it is with the two species mentioned previously.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that there are four ways of suture for the abdomen, but two stitches are common which apply to the stitches in other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And there are two other specific stitches that communicate with other wounds, however they are even more specific to the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I advise you to always have an exposure and declaration for each one.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore say that when the wound is small and there's a reason for the intestine to pass through it, making its reduction difficult, then this is one of two ways: either due to the size of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine swells from exposure to cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when this happens, cover that area by dipping a sponge or cloth in hot water alone, or you take it in cold water and add cypress, thyme, and herbs to the intestine inside where the swelling will be resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes this is done with remedies that contain stiffness, and it's better than just water alone in resolving swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you have resolved the swelling, then moisten the intestine with water containing altitude and basil, which through this calms the tissue around it for few reasons.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If it is allowed to touch the inner parts of the patient near this cure, then divide the rupture with a small sharp tool where veins are incised.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better when it's proper that there isn't a section, and not an occupation to dry near necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the tool, let its shape be like yours:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the tool is sharp, and the other part is not acute, and the extremity is subtle, and do not be like the subtlety of a needle, before it becomes blunt for a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the wound is enlarged and pushes out the intestine, then it should guide that its reduction be according to its natural shape, in its proper place, if possible upon this, which is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the rupture is enlarged and it's in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back, place their legs higher than their head; and if it's in the upper part of the abdomen, then place their head higher than their feet and have the other parts of the body above that.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you should contemplate and consider it constantly so that the part where the wound is will be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus see to it that you administer this in large wounds and in minor wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, make that your preparation be paused, and then let it be given to your most experienced person, which has the entire rupture under their hand, and adjusts their hands, and roughly expose from one to another what causes for stitching differently.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: one that you take the needle, or count the size of the needle according to the width of the wound; and then let the end of the rupture of the ring finger lie freely, and firmly hold the needle once, or another so that you do not insert the needle into both ends of the string, at both ends of the middle bone where the string is left inside, as it allows that part to go through that part; and you have added both ends of the string and both ends of the middle bone, and you make four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen the needle twice in the circuit of the string, and some times from both parts at once, and add the two flaps and wound with a decent addition; and let the thickness of the finger lie, insert another needle in that area, and hold that by the thread as you did with the first needle; and do not stop this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And may the needles be of medium hardness between coarseness and subtlety, for the subtle needles barely cut into the flesh; and the thicker ones are difficult to handle in the string, so you should make them medium in both subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And do not let the needle be stuck in both ends of the string close together, so that the flesh is not cut too easily and the wound heals before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not make prolonged stitches for the wound not to be prohibited from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not fall off the patient in his sleep; place powders from all parts over the stitches, which have the ends of the needles; let those be until you know that the wound has already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these kinds of stitching with needles in common method are more suitable for small wounds, until even in the stitching of their single needle or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second method of stitching is common: and you should administer in stitches all four ends, of the string and both ends of the middle bone, in one go, with a needle that has its tip enveloped equally in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when you have penetrated all these four ends with the needle from that part where you started, return the needle to that middle part of which you began, so that the thread pulled back goes up towards the wound, so that the stitches are according to sewing fabric for which the fabrics are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And between every stitch place the thickness of the finger's width.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this is the way we know how to stitch.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such stitching, I healed the wound that happened to a man in his abdomen which had been wounded by a thorn, and it was the rupture of the larger wound of a palm's length, and it was located outside two palms from my waist on both sides; and then I returned that deposit once the intestine had gone through the wound for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated within about 15 days or so, and I cured that and he healed; then you should wait this long for rest, and it's talked of in his behavior.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he was not healed; and by a miracle, for which I did not cure him with ointment, which was in a place where ointment could not be applied or any medicine, but left on the wound like twice a day and frequent washing with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	There are two types of suture according to the account of Parula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you begin with the sewing of the seam, and insert your needle from one part to the other inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus when the needle enters into the seam and at that point puts in threads according to straightness and length throughout the entire body, leaving the tip of the suture where you have inserted the needle; and makes the needle penetrate through the other end the thread from one part to the other inside-out at the other end of the stitch.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made it penetrate that one, then you make it penetrate another opening in that outermost end of the stitch at the part from outside to inside; and leave the tip of the suture which is in this way, and make the needle penetrate through the other end of the stitch from inside to outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the insertion of your needle also penetrate in the suture at which you have made that penetration through the stitch where all this should be able to enter.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And from this side of the hand begin to insert that on the end which is inside the suture at this other side, and pull out the thread from the seam through which it penetrated, then return it into its own seam and place the tip of the stitch that is on this other side at this end; and pull out that one from the seam which comes from part of him.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one time and another, and repeat it in the same way between which you sew everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the entirety of this method of sewing is that you sew in a stitch on the suture made from skin where you sew the leather, namely that you sew through once on one side of the seam, and leave that other opening until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second type of own suture that is called Gualia, this refers to the treatment and as recommended by them, it means that you sew according to similarity on which some doctors sew, namely that they add every part to its corresponding part according to nature; and place the tip of another part and the tip of the stitch at the other end of this part, and this is done according to what I have advised you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you have placed the needle at the tip of the stitch near your own part from outside, make it penetrate inside in that sole, and leave two ends of the suture; and then revolve the needle, making it penetrate through to the inside in two ends of the stitch.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then rotate each of those separately, making some parts from inside penetrate into the part from outside in two ends of the stitch other than those located on this opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of sewing is better than the common light sewing, and it is the kind of sewing that I have previously remembered.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the treatment according to Gualia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And thus they would say like this, the sewing of the belly is corrected with two needles; so you insert into these each one a thread, and start by inserting the needle from which you should sew, making it penetrate through to the other side according to the sewing that makes people equalize their bodies.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle location of the belly, then the sewing of this becomes more difficult than from other locations of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The method of treatment for gout is judgement among the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	And this is the cause when you have caught gout at the beginning of its attack before the air alters it, and return the intestine and sew here appropriately, then place over that the powdery matter.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the gout, then place over that certain ointments which you have in your possession so that they make hard wax and seal the threads, and are compacted by skin and stitch; and then treat it thus as treatment for the other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have the medicines at your disposal, then pause over that immediately, because it starts to expel pus, bile, and alternate between two times a day, just as you were taught, until it is healed. If there are no other plagues than these simple ones.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear that the gout might spread to the main limbs, then when you have submerged wool in oil of good quality or in rubbed oil, and leave this immersed over the areas between the armpits and let those oils rest.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in his intestines, at those times when this happens regularly, then treat that with vinegar of a black stinging beetle, and especially if the bleeding is blocked in the intestine and causes passage through its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that which comes from the large intestine is a lighter healing pus compared to that found in the finer intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal which is called "gegunu" the intestine that does not receive treatment for gout because it affects him completely; and this is due to the large number of veins in him and the magnitude they have in those, and by the subtlety of his body and by his proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you're dealing with is the tissue of the disease and you've identified it clearly, then follow this procedure: return the first intestine according to your method until you reduce all the hernias equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has reached the patient's space and is now either red or black, then strengthen that on his body at the site where the condition of degradation affects him, so that there are flows of disease, for in the tissue veins and arteries are found.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert what is another piece of that material, pause two extremities of the tissue hanging from the patient's side opposite the disease area, so that over you comes the alleviation of his condition. You must apply your effort to the tension of the tissue and the release of the limb of the disease.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Reminder for diseases when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it may be restored in some individuals. That's why I saw that person who was hit in his belly with a spear and had abdominal disease on the right side of his stomach; the disease had become old and caused fistula, and discomfort from his movements and flatulence.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	So I pursued the healing of him even though it was not resolved in his treatment, but I managed to identify what should be healed and where the area is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I had the location already consolidated, I witnessed over the patient who experienced that unfortunate event in his belly; and did not allow any further bad events to happen due to that unfortunate accident and disrupted his dietary habits by eating and drinking, instead practicing in moderation with baths and exercising as prescribed.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones have said that when disease occurs in the intestine and it's small, then you should bind it according to this manner: take large caps; next adjust both sides of the disease and place a burning stick from those that make its mouth open over both sides of the disease. So when he takes on those and strengthens his mouth, cut off the head of him, which adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another stick near the first one, and do not stop doing this by placing sticks one close to another according to the quantity of the entire disease.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and thus the disease; grind those excess caps inside the intestine until the intestine is healed; do not let the patient suffer from any injury.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine will be joined with the fine thing which is made from the intestine of beasts added to him, because they are more twisted. And you take the end of these intestines of animals, and when he's shaved clean, then place the end of him on one of those intestines in a wrap, and insert that intestine into needles and thread around that particular animal's intestine, reduce it during the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this way of sewing with sticks is nothing other than according to the path of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the disease is large and broad, especially if it's in one of the finer intestines, where then there's no solution but surgery, and not full healing for him.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Regarding the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every disease and abscess when it hardens and becomes old, results in an ulcer, which is not consolidated and bleeds for a long time and is not cut off. Therefore, wherever it may be in any part of the body, universally it's named fistula and we call that ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	Fistula according to truth is a hard, fibrous opening, white in color that doesn't hurt and has the same sensation as the pain of exposure; therefore, it's called some places, namely coldness.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some individuals there is wetness which bleeds; and if you increase the humidity it will bleed after a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And in some cases this wetness is a spot, it's small, it's thick, and it's fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned in the division, as I said about diseases, that every ulcer which is not healed and is not on his naked flesh, is this way instead due to one of these causes: among them, one is or due to weakness of blood in the body; or due to his malice; or when between him and the skin is hard meat preventing natural formation of meat; or when it's from a congenital spot; or when that ulcer itself contains pus which is interwoven with him of bad quality; or when medicine is inconvenient for treating him; or when corruption sets in in the region, and there's pestilence; or due to properties of the region like in Saragossa where digestion of maladies becomes difficult and healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or when he has bones or stones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	All those causes have been shown, their signs, and the treatment with medicines are discussed in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	So I will also show you how to heal a fistula which is made through an operation using my knowledge.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; among those, there are fistulas that arise from large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spinal column, or the intestine, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or to any compound joints made like those of hand and chest. Among them, there are those which are closely related to the main member and have a similar appearance.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And among these fissures that occur this way are the diseases of difficult healing, and they do not receive treatment or cure, and care for them involves effort and lack of knowledge.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there is any of these fissures whose depth does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope for its cure and you try to comprehend it, if you want to understand this better, then you attempt with iron or with force, and if the fissure occurs according to rectitude, and you inquire about it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	And if the fissure is twisted, then investigate it with the aid of a subtle lead, which because of the lightness of its body lifts and curves against the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fissure is caused by internal heat, it's not within your capability to perform this operation on them.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore prepare the opening for your openings, through which the moisture with which you cleanse that one must also come from the other openings and pass from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And inquire carefully according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are or nerves, and whether the depth of the fissure is distant or near, or whether it's a fissure with multiple openings that lies over your entire strength, inquiring about the patient through this, and the invention of pain involves your pressure with your hand on the area, and understanding from these significances and causes of accidents to abscesses.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have ascertained all those causes at the true station, then proceed with treatment according to confidence: it is that you consider now whether the fissure appears close or in an external location, distant from joint, or from nerves, or artery, or vein, or any of the areas I told you about and said.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And you dry the fissure according to what was said about its formation of that, and maintain that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which has been born in the opening of the flesh, or part and similar, and treat that inside until it's healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	And if the fissure is of distant depth and occurs according to rectitude, then carve into it as deep as possible, and modify that from all its corrupted flesh; and apply cloths wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those into the cavity of the fissure, which you have comprehended with force.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this in those passages so that the sharp medicine may corrode all that is rotten within the cavity of the fissure and corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments which produce healthy flesh until it's healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	And if it's not healed by this method, then you perform cautery on it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the cause of fissure is bone and you need to certify this, then inquire about it and dry it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main body as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is found by you and there's corruption and darkness in their body, then cut that where the corruption has been entirely; and then treat that so that its flesh within is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it's not healed and continues to bleed like this, then know that you have not eradicated the entire corruption; therefore uncover them again carefully and thoroughly make an account of their condition and modification of their flesh with your ultimate strength, and then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it's healed, then that's good; and if not, then know that the corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which hasn't been achieved, therefore with that you have nothing but leave it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the affected bone is small, or you're able to pull it with force, then you pull that using subtle forceps which suit this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if it's internal bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all those, and from them leave not a cause with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	And if there's some contradiction with a cause of moisture, and in their operation there is neither fear nor error, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	And if there's not preparation for staying the bones of your time, then pause over that wound so that the wound is in it, and leave it within that around those bones and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it's not consolidated, and restrain the section you have cut during your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	But if you fear it, pause on that spot submerged under a heated oil surface, or a spot submerged in Egyptian ointment, or with any of the healing oils, when those ligaments can be removed, and the bones are separated from them by dissection, and that operation eases.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	And if it's a large bone like the rib or thigh bone or similar, and what is corrupted in them is only their skin, then cut that only as far back so that the darkness and corruption are completely removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	And if what is corrupted in them is a large part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then this is necessary to close that and all cut it into the place where the corruption was achieved, and then treat that so that it's consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you that when you operate on a patient in their thigh, place that example and auxiliary support next to your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	For a young man around thirty years old, to whom pain occurs in their thigh, and from the divisions inside there is inflammation within the body where the matter is within the person's body reaching the thigh, and it is matter of abscess with large pus collections, and I do not attribute its cause to extrinsic factors.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then I extend the treatment until reaching the mistake of the doctors where the abscess is opened, and remove the affected matter, and his cure was closely managed as it formed a fistula, and drains are made in the pus openings which all had drainage and the moisture from the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then I underwent multiple surgeries for two years, and I did not know about those in the art, where I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the change in him and the things that flowed from his those openings through a large body; and already the body of that man was all yellowed, and the color of him was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a needle into one of those openings and conducted the needle to the mouth.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I inspected all the openings closely and found that they were reaching them from every direction of the body.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I opened my way and incised into one of those openings where I discovered part of the bone, and removed that corruption, it was already earthy and corrupted and deteriorated; and already a part of the body had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And I tightened that which I discovered was revealed to me from the bone discovered.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I judged that it was not in the bone but that corruption which was spreading and tightening, and I had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then continued the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, but it did not consolidate.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I repeated the process and discovered again on the bone after the first discovery, removing continuous corruption from the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I tightened what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I tried to complete the treatment of this and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered over it another time and did not cease to gradually pierce the bone little by little carefully and completed the restoration of this, but it was not restored until I pierced around a palm of him, and he extracted from his marrow, and then restored that with medicines, and it only consolidated slightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And no repetition is necessary in the operation of this and that section for it but due to the disposition of his stomach for him and due to the lack of tolerance from him due to lack of food, which would happen to him at all times due to excess of evacuation syncopal illness.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus health is through complete healing, and nothing in place of hard bone tissue; and good disposition is made within him in his body and returns his virtue to him; and he is accustomed to his dispositions and does not oppose him in walking nor harm in any case.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	May it be that the bone is prominent in a location of the body already drilled, then guide as to how you perform this second operation: and take hold of the length and strength there at the extremity of that bone that sticks out, and command someone else to extend that to its fullness; and place that piece of cloth wool thicker than the first piece on it; and press that against the flesh which is left from the bone, and extend the extremity of it so you can pull the flesh towards the parts left, and uncover the flesh over the location that you want to tighten so the saw does not cut into the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a bolster or table under that bone appropriately, so when you do this the saw is not prohibited from cutting into the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And guide that the saw is on the corrupted location little by little, so if it's in the concavity of the corrupted bone and doesn't appear in its manifestation to touch, force the closure of this other time.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before it's one continuous part from the other, and the corruption is at the middle or in a part of this, then uncover the flesh from all parts completely; and place a bolster under you, and place the saw on the first part where the corruption is between which the closure of the other part continues.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And make the closure according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it's not through reason but instinctively.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the elbow of the hand or the chest, it's very difficult; however guide that you inquire about the corruption as to how it appears to you, and open it, and show it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and with each instinct rectify it for you when it does not oppose your veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know which are the ones that penetrate and the saws to pierce these bones are very much according to the location of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and greatness and smallness of those, and their hardness and their rarity; so guide that you prepare for every species of operation tool suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that such an operation means to you about the special use of the instrument with which you would be equipped; when your knowledge is extensive and long, and you are familiar with the methods of this art, and have experience in dealing with ailments, then you can apply what suits each instrument for all ailments.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I will show you at the end of this chapter the number of tools you will use, which are as simple as those on which you will proceed with your prohibition, which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Saw shape:
Forma de autra serra:	Other saw shape:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Shape of a rasp or file:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this rasp should be in the shape of the tip of a star-shaped key, and its points should follow the shape of the points on a file.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not to rub only at those places where the joints are corrupted, or if there's a large wide mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of the larger razors:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of the smaller razors:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of the side razors:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another well-made saw: have it form an arc above the pus bulge and the sharpness of its iron. Let the member of its handle descend somewhat in making.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of the razor where it has hollowed out:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another curved-end razor:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of the small rasp resembling a spiderweb:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of incisors in which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another smaller cutting instrument:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another cutting tool; this resembles a rasp, and its end is like a saw, it exhibits in moist places along the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of a rasp which suits to the ratio of that which pierces the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and has an acute tip.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly hollowed like all the causes that we have mentioned for rasors, cutters, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the ends of incision and of the joint closure of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The ends press or due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or when you have treated that corruption with the healing of those medicines and the healing does not come about, or sometimes the corruption disappears from the body without your touching it for any cause. Then hollow out that limb into this until the diseased part reaches the diseased area; so that the patient may escape death or disease which is more harmful to the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of what you are dealing with is that the limb becomes black inside until it reaches the point where it has been burned, or you let the darkness go inside to that part of the limb which has gone black and will spread throughout its body; thus make your incision in this way.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if it is the cause of corruption due to the impact of some poisonous causes such as by a sea scorpion or a viper or a snakebite and its like.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is at the end of the finger, then you will cut the finger and do not leave space for the corruption to spread into your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it reaches the hand, then you will cut that from the palm of the hand, and do not allow space for corruption to spread within to reach into the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you have reached that point, then cut the arm in between the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes beyond and surrounds the elbow area, then death of the patient is at that point; and to administer another cause in this treatment is a lot of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do for the chest when corruption reaches the palm of the hand, then you will cut that between the two thumbs.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it spreads to the center of the chest, then you will cut the entire chest.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Perhaps if it extends into the groove, then you will cut the area between the groove's joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread beyond the groove, then there is no help but resignation, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of cutting or sawing the limb is that you strengthen one ligament at the place where you want to cut, and then place another ligament over it. Extend your assistant's hand with another ligament across the remaining parts, and extend their hand with another ligament in those areas; then you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments so that all the flesh is exposed under a slit or saw mark; then cut or saw nearby.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And make sure a sheet of cloth is laid out from all directions so that it does not touch the spot, and bring the patient's injury neatly dressed and with a scald.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Perhaps if there is bleeding during your work, then you will cauterize the area cautiously, or place some powders that strengthen the blood on it; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And bind the affected limb with ligaments as comfortable, and treat it until it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you of an event that occurred to a man in his foot, this is an accident that befell him which I and you advise against, one that involves darkness in his foot and the mixture was akin to fire's combustion.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption occurs first in his little finger within which it tends throughout his foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself to drain pus as he saw the healing proceed towards his limb with the intensity of its progress causing pain and discomfort for him. And it spread that foot into the joint, and the cure took place.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long ago this corruption event occurred in his little finger of the hand indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it reaches me, and I must consider to reflect this excess upon the one who practices medicine on his body; and this excess does not reflect but begins to proceed into another finger within which it started in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to insert my hand into his, and I don't want to do this fearing the reflection of that excess, more than I fear your hand's death, for the virtue of the thigh is upon cutting.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he was no longer under my care, he returned to his land and came back to me that the man prepared himself and inserted his entire hand, and he recovered.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not provided this narrative for no other reason than to aid in understanding this disease and its consequences, so that it may be significant as it is explained and according to which it was treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Regarding the cure of stones and the quality of enemas along with medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in any fleshly members and the space of the abscess is extended until it collects pus, then it bursts and perforates, and pus flows out from it, leaving the area empty as if it were a vessel, and the wound opens like cloth under it, and does not reach deeper corruption, nor seeps into bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a stone (or cyst), and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space extends into which corruption begins in some member, then it is called a fistula and I don't use that term.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is to insert that wound completely as it has moved, and especially when it is subtle like cloth, and you make sure not to stick to the area because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	And if you hope that the wound sticks and that this corruption hasn't achieved its later consequence, and in the wound there is a passage towards it, then you treat that with an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider it as a stone, and if it is large, the arm that you use has an oily smell, then treat with an Egyptian enema made from oil and wine mixed in equal parts, which are adjusted in a vessel, and they are placed over the fire until the medicine boils and reaches honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve it with water and honey; treat with that for the stone, strengthen his opening, and leave the medicine in him for the duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then remove that from its location; do this for several days until the stone is removed and his body is recovered.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some times it is treated with ash water when this medicine isn't available to you; and then take the ashes of vinegar, put them in water; and then boil that and treat with it while you are convinced that the stone is gone.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the thigh doesn't tolerate this Egyptian medicine or ash water, then treat with water and honey which is mixed with zinian triissat; and treat with wine and honey that has been mixed together. Wherein a property of honey is to modify and wash, and wine makes the stone adhere, especially when there's excess of coagulation and drying in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And as you do this for some times and you are convinced that the stone is already removed, then treat with what gives birth to flesh in him.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take from the diaphanous paste, and dissolve that with rubbed oil and wine coagulant; or treat with it those enemas and other ointments that have the properties which I already wrote about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the stone is widened where no enema tube can be inserted, then you gradually enlarge that with small iron, and pause in it a heated envelope covered in Egyptian ointment or basilicon oil, until it's enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the opening is wide, then you add his lips to him with stitches and leave him a quantity in which an enema fits.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening of his body through which blood flows is elevated to its parts above it, then dry that in the lower part of the pus where it's in him so that the blood can flow away from it; when the blood is restricted in the depth of the stone, flesh will be generated in him.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it's not possible to dry the stone inside the vicinity of the bone in the lower part of the pus as you wish, then pierce and prepare the limb according to your preparation so that blood flows slightly from him when he is able to do this without leaving any obstruction for the blood.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take consolidating medicines that are placed over the suitable sinus towards which you want to extend those above the patient's sheet.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the sheet should be of such size that it facilitates communication through all the sinus; then, cut with the knives along the right side of the sinus opening, making the incision wider than the sinus opening and slightly longer. Then, extend onto another part of the patient's sheet with the lion's ointment according to the length of the cut, place this over that part far from the sinus opening so as to lubricate the motion of their arm and avoid tearing a large piece of the cloth until a few days later doing it once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	Let that which is over the sinus opening be done, which you reinforce at all times to prevent any damage to their arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know whether what flows from their arm is much or little, or if it's digestible or not.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And also pay attention to the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it's in their abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, observe the matter that's discharged over the sinus opening already adhering or if it's acquiring adherence. If you have to remove it, then change the sheet and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	Let it be known that if there's a substantial distance from the sinus to the virus, don't discard the patient's body fluids; they are part of their healing process. This is especially true for those who take longer in their bodily processes during illnesses, and conversely, it applies to others as well.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if it takes several days for the arm to digest after coming close to the sinus, then you'll know that there is no adherence from the sinus. And if the adherence of the sinus takes time and is the cause of prolongation, then adjust in drying off the medicines; and if the medicines are wetted by their substance and by their effectiveness, they're dried just like lion's ointment, when it comes to their excessive addition of salve.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the key to what is healed later on, is taking lion's ointment and dissolving it in clarified oil, then applying it to their skin matching its substance, and closely placing this over them, using it accordingly.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And when there's no arm present in that action, lion's ointment and honey mixed together should be used when it's coiled inside, applying it; or take myrrh and aloes and grind them all with honey on the flame, then apply this over a sheet and reinforce it above the sinus; and apply this on top of the honey-coil which gets thickened from being cooked, then grind it further on the sheet reinforcing it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some times, when dealing with aristocracy and their reasons (and the celestial lily among others) and fine flour from almonds and centaury, use these simple or refined ingredients, grind them finely and sift them over the honey I've suggested; and utilize this.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus extends and isn't healed by this treatment, then you'll know that corruption is in them, already investigating within bones or other hard parts or joints. Then, you treat it with tuberculous disease therapy, as previously mentioned.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	From the treatment of infected skin and cut nails, addition of a finger incision, and sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarix is an abscess which leaves nails on the tips of fingers or toes, and strengthens other nails. If it's prolonged and its treatment is costly, it either becomes a pus-filled abscess, or gets corrupted, and corrodes the substance of the nail from within, weakening all of it and spreading its corruption to the bone where it produces an unpleasant smell, and the end of that finger is cut off, and the color turns black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you've reached that which we explained in the division and your treatment doesn't take effect, then know that you should cut out all the excess that has accumulated under the nail and proceed to cauterize the wound closely around it, as vigorous heat is beneficial for this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Let it be that the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and if the extensions of the nail have already covered the flesh to their inner parts, they start poking it and lead you so. Then know that you should pause at the delicate point leaving the corner of the nail when you poke into the flesh, push this inwards and cut through that flesh with ease, place over it what remains from the flesh with burning corrosive medicines until everything is renewed; then proceed to treat it with ointments until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	Let it be that corruption already spreads into the bone; then know that you should cut through the bone there and remove it, because nothing heals when the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you find corrosion and further corruption in the mentioned area, then cut through it using one of its nodes according to how it is being pressed into memory, and proceed to treat it internally until it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	Let it be that under the nail there's percussion or scratching and in that severe pain, then know that you should at the start make a bloodletting on the patient, and proceed to dry the nail with sharp blades crossing downwards through it, remember not to let the drying penetrate into the flesh left behind by the nail, as this might cause severe pain for the patient leading to birth of excessive skin in the area; then treat that spot with what reduces pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	A condition exists which is natural in many men, where their flesh is very soft and their bones are also very soft, or their nails are very soft.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	Such things are natural in the anatomy of a joint, or it's inherent to them within certain joints of the articulations.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	The one that is natural in certain joints has no harm, whereas the one that becomes natural in joints that are soft causes pain.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	Of those that are naturally fatty, the section is slight; this means you should insert it up to where its anatomy meets the joint space.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	As for what is natural at the articulation's joint, healing is difficult; therefore, guard against its reformation.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the case that is natural within an articulation, cover it such that when you insert at the beginning of his flesh, around where the bone starts, do so with a round incision into the bone. Then, use one of those convenient saws nearby and approximately cure that area until it's healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Achieving consolidation which occurs among the articulations due to their natural structure in humans or from the formation of disease or fireburning, or through rubbing - thus cover that consolidation so that after this process, the articulations return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place between their cloths in oil that has been rubbed, so they do not consolidate lightly, and separate them, or place a thin layer of lead between those, according to how you cover.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Likewise, if consolidation occurs in some joints on the palm, then you cure that consolidation according to its preparation and it aligns with the figure of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From an incision of veins, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varicose, and they are thickened veins filled with melancholic excesses that appear in the folds of the body's limbs, and their main occurrence is on the chest, particularly for travelers, workers, and those who carry things.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, when you administer the heart purge for black cholera, perform several folds with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment for their blood is according to two methods: the first is that you incise and remove that black blood, and the other method is that you elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of it is according to this method: insert at the beginning of the chest with water poured inside until the large blood has dissolved, which becomes viscous in the chest, then strengthen the chest of the sick person up to the top part of the thighs between their buttocks and below the anus with a bend, and then bleed the black blood in a place, or in two, or three sections with an extensive bleed-off, and then lift the black blood up to your hand from the end of the chest inside them and above them, until you have extracted the quantity of blood that you want and is sufficient, which will take the virtue of the sick person.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then guide him/her, and instruct them to refrain from eating foods that generate black cholera.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment through bloodletting when the veins are full and this is noticed by the sick person.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of them is according to this method: you should remove the chest of the sick person, if it has folds in the skin, and then immerse him/her in water so that his chest becomes red and the veins are swollen; or it can be exercised through vigorous exercise, if bathing isn't available, while the limb is scraped.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the cord in the right direction of the vein by section along or behind him/her; you should pull out the anus, or from the lower part of him/her, you should pull the tail.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then cut the cord and scrape the vein from all sides until you feel it, and you should notice the appearance of him/her that times when that desire declines towards blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then, when you have evacuated from the cord, you will notice that white line which is the cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you put both of those lines inside where it's elevated and situated above the cord, and you hang that on a nail or a hook.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry another section near that section for three fingers, and then scrape the cord from the part above the vein until you see it.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then lift that and incise there at the rear section which is by the tail, and then extract that and lift that until it's clear through the second section, and then extract that from the section above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Do this until you extract that from the section which is at the top or another of all sections, where everything is clear; then incise that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you don't follow to extract and lift, then insert a needle with strong double thread and tie that one and pull it out, or insert both of them under his/her skin and turn your hand in every direction until it's settled.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And guard that you don't incise it; for if it's broken, it makes it difficult to lift that part and causes damage to the sick person through that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you've gotten all of that out and settled on the site of the injury, cover it with a cloth soaked in oil and rubbed oil as well as regular oil, then cure that until it's healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the body is constricted due to a certain kind of twisting that encapsulates its parts and does not adhere according to what we have said, then you must cut across that area in all directions of twisting in it and the areas around it, and hang that section with strings so that you lift everything up.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful of your section so that you do not pierce the vein and cause pain in that area; it will be difficult for you to lift this part; use your caution in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the incision when the body is dried:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of a clasp mark:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not like the heat of ordinary hands or has an abrupt point so as to damage the vein; it must have a large degree of softness, as if we said. If it were too delicate, it would cut into the vein because of its delicacy; instead, it should have this excess in its grossness as we have mentioned.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Regarding the extraction of the saphenous vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the lower legs, as Al-Ategi in the regions of Arabs and in the southern dry lands of India where there is little vitality, not even grass or shrubs grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And in other parts of the body, it is generated in other regions besides these.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the process of this is like decomposition, which you see in a chain, just as poison exists inside the body in the form of snakes and worms and insects that generate between the chain and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of this disease's occurrence is when this vein encounters inflammation in the leg, causing that area to swell; and near it begins the vein issuing from that swelling, resembling a plant root.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when you notice the extension at that point, then cover it with a piece of lead whose weight is equal to one pound, within two pounds, and place that and soften the lead hanging from the chest.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you see that there's a cause for it outside the parts, wrap this in lead and smooth it out.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the disease is prolonged, then you must cut a part of it and wrap the rest; do not cut that part too deeply as it should be just below the skin. If you cut too deep, it constricts and enters the flesh, causing an abscess, pus formation, and a bad ulcer in the area.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	And when treated gently and extracted little by little, so that it is removed from the rear end of the leg and does not allow any cause to remain within the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And this vein protrudes in some individuals that extend up to several hands of length, and it has reached me such that one I observed extended up to about twenty hands.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the needle into the tendon of that leg and pierce that with a long needle inside the body, so that everything within can be evacuated. Administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; after that, treat it for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has bumps, especially when it appears at the joint of the leg or in the leg itself, and comes to have open sores, and exists from every open hole branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And treat it as we have said for its extraction and according to what was mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Regarding the section made on worms that are generated under the skin, it is called "bovine discomfort".
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is named in some regions as "bovine discomfort", due to the symptoms that are often present in cattle and it involves worms inside a creature, which is born between the chain (likely referring to connective tissue) and flesh. These worms move throughout the entire body both upwards and downwards, and they manifest themselves through feelings of discomfort when felt within each part of their body as they disrupt the chain and cause pain externally.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to the corruption of certain fluids like worms, snakes, earthworms, and hookworms in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is found through the mischief of this (illness), when it moves within the body and rises to the head, and then the fluids in the body become thickened and enter inside, destroying the brain. This results in various swellings.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you wish to treat and extract this, do it only if you recognize its symptoms clearly and see it within the body. Then cut where you find any thickening or swelling, and smoothly remove it with firm constriction around it. Proceed by drying it out and extracting it accordingly.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is found in the flesh and you do not feel it, then place a cautery with fire over that area from where it lives. The main cause feared is corruption within which corrupts that area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if it penetrates to the head close to the brain, then press firmly over the eyebrow with strong constriction, proceed by drying it out further and extract; take care that the body uses medicine for alteration of its body, with medicines expelling bad putrid fluids, and avoid foods causing corruption.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Regarding the section on bovine discomfort.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is named 'nafir' in our land, and it is pain that occurs in some limbs, and spreads from limb to limb.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen this as per what I will recount to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was summoned to treat a sick woman in a village, and I found her arm with a small swelling on the vein of the arm. After letting it sit for an hour, I saw that swelling move up like water being squeezed, more quickly than air, as if it were live silver when it moves from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain in that area is felt within the muscle, and here I stay for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And here flows towards the other side across which it reaches to the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And here I was told that it would move around in its entire body as I saw, which amazed me with the movement and speed of member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen something similar in my patients according to that manner, but I have observed movements where the pain is being swapped from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But in this case, with the patient like in the woman, I did not see it so clearly.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was like this until now because the woman is elderly, with thick veins and exposed arteries, and in this case appears that sensation of circulating wind from one part to another.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this backflow in those who are juicy and have moist veins that clot together.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And if you wish for the cure of them, and the patient feels this pain, then it is not like what we have said in your presence, so you press on that spot lightly and dryly over that place where that circulating wind is being contained, and cauterize that area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you don't experience this in your patients, then you treat that with the release of the body and whatever drives away wind, and take those with stink pills and those with serapin and resemble them.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to the species, and according to the locations in the body where they can be found. Their diversity lies in that some have large points, small ones, concave ones, dull ones, and they are solid; and others have three angles, and those to which they have tongues; and those to which they are spines.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which depends on the limbs and places where I find them is according to two ways: either in the main members or in those of their respective organs, like the brain, heart, stomach, lungs, intestines, and bladder; as well as their equivalents. So when you catch one in any of these parts and show signs of death, which cause I will explain later, then you should avoid extracting that arrow in those where death has taken it from them in the most vital locations. And when you do not see these symptoms of illness appearing on you, or when the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the limb; then you extract that one and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And for the symptoms of poisoning: if you catch an arrow, and it pierces through the bone, and becomes stuck in the cerebral cavity which is above the brain, causing it to become inflamed due to excessive heat, blindness, dizziness, nausea, swelling and inflammation of the tongue, spasms affecting reason, vomiting caused by anger, loss of speech, and the voice is destroyed, along with a white moist location that resembles dust appearing at the site of the wound. The eyes resemble the moisture in the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore, if you notice these symptoms on you, then refrain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	The symptoms of the arrow when found in the heart are that it is close to the left breast, and feels as though it has been stuck into hard matter, not visible flesh; and the movement of the arrow resembles the movement of the wrist, and the condition at the wound site shows blackness, causing a cold sensation at the extremities, sweatiness, and fainting; and thus know that death descends from head to foot.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The symptoms when the arrow has pierced the lungs are a sensation of dampness in the wound area and blood bubbles at the wound site; vessels near the throat become blocked, and there is a change in the color of the body, it breathes out a large amount of spirit, and asks for air to be breathed in strongly.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if you find the arrow in the spleen which is located in the thighs, then the pain is close to the small ribs, and there's a great intense pain accompanied by sighing, and not all of the muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you find the arrow in the stomach, then there's a certain indigestion causing discomfort at the wound site.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if you find the arrow in the abdomen, and it is stuck there, there's a hole at the wound site, or tissue, or intestine which has been ruptured; there's no hope for treating that injury by extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow finds its way into the bladder and causes the urine to flow out uncontrollably, it may cause certain effects leading to symptoms being produced externally; and there's pain on the body, in that case, know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	For the other limbs such as the face, throat, and chest, shoulders and accessories, as well as the ribs of the back, the breastbone, waistband, and the like equivalents of body parts, they are saved according to the most vital locations when the arrow does not encounter a vein or artery and is not venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will advise you on this based on what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you can understand about their effect in treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This is the cause: when an arrow wounds in the lacrimal gland of the eye in the root of the nose, I extract that from him on the other side. You leave his ear wax for him, and he recovers, and no harm occurs to his nose thereafter.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I also extract another arrow from a judge which wounded him in his nose on the wax of its nostril. You leave the eyelid and let it go, and the arrow was already hidden so that nothing could be obtained from that except for a small tip at which it adhered to his shaft. It was a large arrow among arrows of sharp Turks, made of lion's bone in which there were no earwax.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And if it is the judge (who has been wounded), then no harm occurs to his nose by any bad accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extract another arrow from a Christian man which was embedded in the shoulder blade, and it was an Arab arrow, and that is the one with earwax. And then I pierce through that between two bones; it was already submerged in his shoulder blade. Then I refine on that, and I proceed to remove that, and the Christian recovers.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extract another arrow from a man which was embedded in his abdomen, and I thought that he would die from it; and so, since the thirty days had passed and no change occurred regarding any cause of his condition, I pierce through the arrow and focus on it, and he recovers, and no harm occurs to him by any bad accident thereafter.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I have seen a man in whom an arrow wounded him on both sides, and the infection had solidified on him. And since it has been seven years, I inserted the arrow into the root of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I have seen a woman who was wounded in her abdomen by an arrow; the infection has consolidated inside her and has not changed regarding her usual conditions. The woman did not experience any harm during some of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I have seen another man to whom an arrow wounded his face; the infection has consolidated and expelled the arrow, without causing any pain or similar symptoms here.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extract the arrow from the king's prince's man which was embedded in the middle of his nose; it had already declined to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called upon to treat him near the insertion point of the arrow within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I focused on the infection from the arrow wound; and then I probed around with a tool gently, but did not feel it. Yet he felt that pinpoint just under his right ear; and so I suspected that this point was at the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied oil in the place where there is an attractive and digestive power, confirming to myself that this location is what we should focus on so that it appears to me the place of the arrow, so that it succeeds upon that.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no harm occurs in the significant location that you have obtained this place; and I continued applying oil on him for many days without any harm occurring. And the infection has consolidated, while his nose's removal space lasts for several days until I feel the arrow inside his nose and recount this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I placed on the wound a quick-corrosive medicine for several days until I opened it, and by the tool, I focused on that point, and felt the tip of the arrow which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjusted during the opening of the wound from that quick medicine until the tip of the arrow became visibly apparent to me, and I spent this time over that for the period of time within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And as the infection expanded, it became possible for me to insert the scissors into him and refine that area. I did not experience any pain or discomfort with this method. Therefore, I did not continue to refine and engineer on that using various tools until a day began on that using various forceps insertion methods according to how those appeared at the tip of the nose, then I extracted that; and then I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors thought that the nasal cartilage would not be restored, but I restored it and the wound has consolidated. His nose is fully recovered and he does not suffer in any way from this.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I advise you on the quality of extracting some arrows in order that you take this rule and meaning into consideration for what I have not mentioned, since these parts of this art and these definitions are not understood from the narrative nor do they comprehend her freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the artisans wisely compare on a few matters; and about this which is present compared to what is absent; and finds new operations and new instruments you should descend from the causes of foreign arts when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so I say that arrows are not extricated from within the members where they are attached, but according to two ways: or by penetration into the location where they enter; or by the opposite of the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is extricated through the location gives entry, or it is an arrow proceeding in a meaty location, it is thrown and externally extracted.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not feel any discomfort at the time when you catch it, then cover that until several days where the meat around it recedes, and ease the entry of it and its departure.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	When something is affected internally and does not respond to your judgment, then smooth that out for a few days and continue with the treatment each day, until it has been cured.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not respond to your judgment for a few days, then you should investigate that it is where you puncture in the circuit of the arrow in that part from all sides into the subtle location under which the place is magnified by the arrow, and then remove that.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bones of the head and has progressed into one of the cavities in the brain, causing such accidents as I've mentioned, then refrain from removing the arrow but leave it where its being is equivalent to that for a few days; for if the arrow penetrates the skull, then death will not be prolonged for them.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck only in the bone of the body and does not go into the skull, but stays in the head for a few days, and does not happen to it any cause of those accidents, then you should proceed with the extraction of the arrow and its extraction.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And if it is moving and does not respond to your extraction, then you administer travels in the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and treat the area so that it becomes healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is already hidden in the body location, and hidden from feeling, then you investigate that by temptation, and if you feel it, then pull it with such instruments as are suitable for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot do it over it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the pin, and here is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then you should cut through the wound where it is magnified and where it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if they are in your earlobe at which it is stuck from all sides to the entirety of the organ that you can do; and operate on this, if you cannot remove the flesh from the fracture of the earlobes and in twisting those among which you judge.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location where it is, then you use twisting of your hand with forceps from all sides into which she does that obey; and delicately with subtle subtlety that the arrow will not be broken and that make it difficult for your difficult extraction of her and that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do that in your time, then you leave for a few days within which the parts that are in the circuit of her should relieve, and proceed with that which is now relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And if it causes you the opposite effect of blood flow, then you administer what we said about treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your skill from the incision of vein or nerve, or cord, and perform any manner of operation that you can for the removal of the arrow; do this with ease, tranquility, speed, and firmness as I have recommended to you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And thus make the arrow contract by itself so that the head is according to the figure according to which you must place the installation of the arrow in him, for it is more convenient.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	And if that is not possible for you, then you administer what is possible for you through the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	And if the arrows are outside being knocked by the opposite side, or that already progresses one part to the parts of outside, or causes weakness in the extremity of the arrow due to the sensation of the part further above the point of entry and sometimes that is eminent; then you should know about that; and let it be according to quantity where the forceps take; and proceed by pulling her, for she responds easily to judgment.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it is stuck in the bone, then you twist the hand opposite so that the arrow begins to penetrate into the bone, and enlarge yourself, and proceed by extracting her.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave her for a few days, and then proceed with extracting her until you feel something.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the stem of the arrow is inside that, then you push it towards there.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the stem is broken and you want to administer pressure, then you insert that, if it is numb, use an instrument concave so that fits into the cavity of him in the side of the arrow, and proceed by pushing her towards there.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	And if the arrow is concave, then you push her with a firm instrument entering that, for the arrow relieves due to that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is corroded, then you should hollow out all the flesh in which it is located, if that is possible for you, and proceed to treat her with what suits.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow is in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or on the side, and it approaches that you touch her by temptation, and it is possible for you to operate on her, then operate on her and beware of cutting into a vein or nerve, extract her, and proceed with closing the wound if appropriate, and treat her so that she becomes healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Shape of the forceps to which arrows are pulled:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let their ends be like a duckbill that they make like pliers when they take hold of the arrow so as not to let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And among those are made special marks, large, few and middle-sized, depending on the quantity of the size of the arrow and its sharpness, as well as the breadth of the wound, and the constriction thereof.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of the concave end of this extremity curved thus like that of an arrow for so it alleviates the entry wound in him, and impulse of that silent one:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of the blunt end of the extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Thus like a ray for it alleviates her entry in the interior by means of the concave arrow and pushes towards that one.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Regarding bloodletting from the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of bloodletting which usually require bloodletting are... [the specific veins would follow in a more complete text]... .xxx., of which there are in the head .xvi., These are the two pulsating veins, which are near the temples, they are called Auricularis; these two herbs are in both of the temples visible; and two veins that are in the two lacrimals under each eye they are called Lacrimal; and a vein prepared in the middle part of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guide veins located on the neck; and two veins that are above the lips; and two veins that are below the lips; and - these are the veins that are called Algenic; and these are two veins that drain the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are to be bloodletted in the arms are .v.; Among those veins, one is cephalic, it's from the wild liver; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and silently, it's a middle-sized vein, and is composed of a branch of basilica, and another branch of cephalica; and name that the people call it "vein of whole body" and basilica is the vein which is placed in the wild liver, and named "twinkling", and they called it by laypeople as "vein of the stomach"; and veins of the arm, it's placed on the belly button, and this is the one where bloodletting is done, and this is the one that appears above the pulse through a visible manifestation; and salvatella, and it's the vein that's between what was said auricular and the little one called pus; and are in its two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the chest and ribcage are three veins; one of those is that leaves the curve of the lower part of the wild liver; and the second is Sophena, its place is to leave the bend of the domestic liver; and sciatic vein, its location is to leave the bend of the wild liver; and in the ribcage there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The youth of the veins that are near the temples is to examine for ancient catarrhs, migraine, and ear discharge or ulcers of old head illnesses.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of seeing those is according to what I recommend to you: it should be with the head of the patient raised and rubbed on the back of the head at the location where both veins are palpable through ample good friction; support the patient's back by your hand in a bend so that both places near the temples can be felt under the two bends, the points being close to the temples in two lower areas of the head; feel that with your hand as I indicated, and if you feel the pulse of those hands, there is testing here.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Close you take the surgical knife, and this is the one that intersects, close you insert that under the vein in the neck between where bloodletting leads to the mouth.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And close raise your hand to the vein and neck towards the upper parts, and cut into the vein with an incision intersecting.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be that of two fingers adjusted or around this; and bleed out the blood until you desire.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And close strengthen with powders and leave it in where it will heal.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already, in the introduction to this work, we have discussed the incision of these and their cautery treatment.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Among the two arteries, which are in the temples, the quality for bloodletting is old migraine, bad and recurrent, and frequent ophthalmic issues, and the flow of excessive acute body discharges in patients.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bloodletting those is according to what I recommend to you: strengthen the patient's back with your hand in a bend so that both veins can be felt through manifest palpation, and demonstrate the pulse of each side of yours mentioned; then here you test.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And close you raise the neck above the vein towards your indicated area, and insert the bloodletting tool diagonally below it; lift up the vein in its place; cut that like you did with other veins; let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And close untie the constriction of the back, place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then rest over that spot with powders and strengthen it under a firm pressure; leave it in where it will heal.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already the recall of them, and their incisions, and their extraction have been mentioned in the beginning of this text.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the quality of bloodletting from the frontal vein is close to bloodletting from the cephalic veins for old facial ailments, migraine, heat, and infected ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of the bloodletting for this patient is according to what I recommend to you; so, when the patient strengthens his stomach with a lump inside where a vein appears; and then take the tool which is called the 'fossori' from which this has its shape:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the point of the probe on the head of the fossori over that vein and hit it towards your body or towards another cause in the manner of you, let the blood flow according to the amount which you want; and then relieve the puncture in the patient and strengthen that inside so that it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Some observations are made during bloodletting at the site of bloodletting, but not that the bloodletting is of acute extremity as with other bloodlettings, before it's on this side of the extremity, and that bloodletting in a transverse way, where the bone is close to him makes me break the bloodletting when it's delicate.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	Let the youth of the two veins that are in the tear ducts of both nostrils by scabies from nostril by soreness and pus in the nostrils, and for face's diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of bloodletting is that the patient's stomach strengthens with a lump and then perform bloodletting on those areas, making sure you stand over the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And when bloodletting is done in a transverse direction along the length for a few times, where there is no meat in the area; and if the bloodletting is delicate, break its extremity.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as necessary for you, place your hand on those spots, strengthen them with one night, and then relieve those areas.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Let bloodletting of the vein in the nose be suitable for acute fever and strong heat, as well as face diseases and migraines that occur in the face, especially when they are old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of bloodletting for this patient is that the stomach strengthens its body and places it under your left hand on their nose. Take the delicate but long bloodletting tool and place it in the middle of the nose's peak according to straightness, where the vein doesn't appear here, and when blood starts flowing shortly.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Remember to end your hand with the small bloodletting tool gradually and let the blood flow according to your need; then relieve that for one night, as it is restored quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Let the youth of bloodletting lead to constriction of the eye and the onset of leprosy, as well as bad face diseases, itching and ulcers caused by corrosive substances like mercury.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of bloodletting for these is that the stomach strengthens each one in its body with firmness; and the surgeons are above the head of the stomach, and the stomach should be lying on a pillow.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then perform bloodletting along the vein longitudinally with large delicate tools gradually; and then extract blood according to the season, quantity or according to what necessity you desire that it is about; and then simulate like the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then relieve the firmness and strengthen both veins in mid-contraction so that the stomach is not infected, let it heal inside until the disease is cured.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The youth of bloodletting for the veins of the alerich region corresponds to small pustules and blisters in the mouth, decay of gum tissues, bad ulcers, cracks, and bad ulcers that occur in the nose and within its circuit.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of bloodletting for those is to behead the stomach in front of you, strengthen its body with a lump and then rotate the lips around. Look at both veins where one belongs to the right side of the lip and the other to the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the darkness of each on both sides, and it's more so when within their circuit those are small black veins; and then cut each one through an incident incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you have doubt and do not know which one of those is, then you understand through an incision in the largest of them, and from the evident pus of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And simulate the appearance of both veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Traditionally, it was more common to cut through the two veins that are on the lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The two veins that are left for the tongue develop in anticipation of bloodletting for the head region, before infection areas are in the gutturary cavity, for throat diseases and oral diseases.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of bloodletting those is that follow the stomach between your own at the front of the throat, lift the tongue from them, look at the tongue, from one side of its vein and the other side's vein, and the color of each declines to darkness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform bloodletting on any of them; and be careful not to end your hand with bloodletting on those, as they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Your veins that are bloodletted in the armpit are in those where pain typically occurs in all men, and bloodletting for them is performed according to two ways, or they put it with a mirtilat or olive-shaped tool gradually decreasing in thickness; or they cut with a surgical knife, and call this 'incision', and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	This settling is what you need for the section, and among them are specific larger and finer ones according to the width of the veins and according to their tightness.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of pleurotomization:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let the incision be as you desire, and prepare to open the concave full veins that appear gross and large, and near those that contain large hard stones.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of pleurotomization for an olive:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this pleurotomization is of lesser breadth and has a more subtle extremity, suitable for pleurotomizing subtle veins that contain small citron stones.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Let the juvenile of the pleurotomization of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: extract the stone from the abdominal maladies that are in the liver and gallbladder, as well as from what affects the belly and the abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And when the pleurotomizer performs this pleurotomization, he must protect that area and be careful in that place, where it has an artery near it, and if he misses or adjusts during the pleurotomization puncture, that artery will bleed and cause the discharge of stones, so beware not to pleurotome there with a sharp tool before cutting as desired.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear through manifest observation, then beware that you leave it and change to another, or search for any similar vein; or pleurotome in a location at the end of the arm where that is evident; and perform this pleurotomization with care as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	And if you want the pleurotomization of the metacarpus, then look ahead to the constriction of the arm where you feel the location between the wrist bones, and carefully place your hand on it with pressure; and adjust the arm and perform this pleurotomization on a concave section of the vein as we have said; and be careful not to press beyond some distance from the site of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you press, with the strength of your fingers, inflate in the place that you have placed under pressure with pressure; then that inflation is an inflation of the artery, and thus avoid that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the stone flows in this pleurotomization like the urine of a child, and the stone is small round, then you know that it's from the stone of the artery; and then take your fingers and place them on it for a long distance; and adjust your position, and if the stone is removed, as seen stones are removed, then strengthen your arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And protect the patient from the baby's wound, be careful about it and don't let him hurt that for a few days until he recovers.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the stone is not removed, and you are supposed to not give medicine to this, then you will cut into the artery, if it appears to you; where its extremity is contracted, and the stone is removed; or that you take a longer time of fasting, and make this, and hold one finger on the place of the vein near the bone under the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the stone is removed, it's good; and otherwise, then treat that with this for which it was preceded to recall the memory of the powders that cause discharge of stones.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the removal of the stone from this is difficult in many situations due to the location close to the wound and the flexibility of the arm muscle.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	The pleurotomization of the dark vein is performed in a juvenile manner where we extract the stone from the upper part near the head and the lower part by the chest; for this reason it consists of branches from the basilic and cephalic veins as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And the pleurotomizer must protect that area which is prone during this pleurotomization, where it has a nerve near it; and if he misses or adjusts during the pleurotomization puncture and finds the nerve, it will cause you to go numb, making recovery difficult, and if someone is not fully recovered, this nerve is often felt. And if hidden in some people and is subtle but not shown, then beware that when you perform this pleurotomization at a point described with care, avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you perform the pleurotomization longitudinally in this case.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The juvenile of the pleurotomization of the cephalic vein is that you extract the stone from the head and facilitate to abdominal diseases in the lungs.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And be careful in this manner, if you want that the pleurotomes pierce at an olive-shaped pleurotomization or a mirtic one; which is the safest from all veins, without leaving your artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you should take care when performing pleurotomization that you do not pierce the head of the lump only, and search for the least possible location, and do not disturb it, unless it is found during the first pressure at which it should be around this in pleurotomization.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is strongly advised for some individuals that if pleurotomization isn't done in the first pressure, then one should not disturb that lump again.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	And this is the quality of pleurotomization in that and its complications, in which you must consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first one is about knowing that phlebotomy should be conducted only for the sake of health maintenance and with hope for recovery and caution against further maladies. It states that phlebotomy must be done on one of the veins in the arm, these being: cephalic, dark, and basilic; and that phlebotomy is performed at the beginning of spring, before breakfast in spring and autumn, and near winter when signs of congestion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be done until the third hour after the first drop that passes during the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Phlebotomy may be administered whenever it causes convenience and necessity, whether at night or during the day, at any time and under all conditions.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it must be noted that an infant should not undergo phlebotomy until they are fourteen years old, a pregnant woman should not be bled until the fourth month into the seventh, and elderly individuals should not be bled if they have already passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wishes to be bled for any reason, it must be noted that they should have their intestines altered before phlebotomy with a lion's decoction, in case there is a retained wound. So that the veins do not draw excess fluid during phlebotomy on the intestines which are cleansed and should not overflow into the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not bleed the patient excessively, nor during fever and intoxication or in the case of illness or drunkenness until their strength is restored. Nor bleed a sick patient due to dropsy, and more so that phlebotomy should be feared upon colic pain, upon vomiting, and upon stomach ache, and upon multiple sexual actions, labor, and exercise after meals or during nights, or from any cause that dissipates virtue either bodily or animal-like.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And when considering diet in relation to the balance of humors before it if the illness is caused by food and beverages, and with medicines if it's feasible for the patient.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And within the boundaries of reason if any cause forbids it, or due to exercise from some activity that could help make the illness more subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause phlebotomy for the patient during the day, it's around the third hour, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And make sure that the health of that person is protected from all animal accidents during that day, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as labor, excessive worry, sex, and similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And according to their desire, make the causes of presence during that person's treatment be in line with what humans commonly appreciate about fragrance and scent, and like balms and similar things, depending on the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And have the phlebotomist stand by a pillow that is as big as the pillow of the one who needs to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And stretch their arm outwards, and rub that area with the phlebotomist's hand for two or three minutes; and strengthen the ligament by bandaging and wrap that area for two minutes.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the constriction is appropriate, when the constriction does not equal to it, or if there's excess, then prohibit any discharge of the disease; or if it's for soothing, then prohibit the body from producing disease.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And for the constriction, it must be noted that the one who needs to be bled should rub their hands together until the veins swell and are felt.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And for the phlebotomist, they apply a small amount of ancient medicinal oil on their phlebotomy tool. And pause their left hand's pressure over that vein; you place your location where you want phlebotomy to be done so that the vein starts flowing slightly and the percussion is stopped when it hits the vein like a heart beats when you seek it out in that way; thus, there is plenty of air flow; then when you pause on that area with the tool, it should be tightened by applying force onto it, revealing that phlebotomy. The phlebotomist does not pierce the vein, and if they do, that one gets stretched.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, it must be noted that the phlebotomist should be prepared and attentive to all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then pause the phlebotomy tool, but if the vein is punctured in a single minute, then it's finished; otherwise, repeat this process at another minute, leaving that area slightly, or over them with pressure, if that area isn't sore.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is sore, or the illness subsides, then you let it be for one day or two days, and do not strengthen the muscle, as forcing too much could lead to pus formation. Nor enter a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And continue with phlebotomy if the illness persists.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the pulse is small and the disease is subtle, and you fear that not enough disease will be eliminated, then you repeat the phlebotomy in that area according to rectitude and make it smaller in size of pulse. Do this with pressure before the area gets sore; when the area becomes sore for men who are in a state of illness, you reduce the number of pulses.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	And if you find that the area has already become sore, then do not repeat over it, for there is no excuse for any cause; pause over that portion of the oil cavity, which relieves the body of disease.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it's better in this area than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer oil cuts in every phlebotomy where the phlebotomes should forbid the flow of blood from the body, and they make this treatment with a thorn extract and antiseptic when it is placed on one of those over the spot, as the blood is refined and mixed when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the area of the phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, where punctions occur, especially in those who have not been bled but just had an incision or at the location of the small vein, then you burn, and place over the spot a damp sponge infused with water and salt, one slightly scratched, and strengthen that for an hour, as it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And indeed let him do this close to the seat of the blood flow of that vein, in harmony with him or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there remains a certain darkness or greenness in the spot for some days, do not notice this; and if you wish, place over that a cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or a cause of juice from mint or of gentian or similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And punctions occur causing abscesses and swellings, you should perform phlebotomy from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And place your hand over that area, and if you later find soft tissue, keep your compression over that area; then that swelling is bad and harmful. And from thereon protect yourself to place over that a cause of what we have said, as strong blood will flow from the blood artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply plaster in the water where it is heated, so that the area lasts, and then treat that with the other treatment while it heals.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And indeed, let you extract from blood to every man according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then let it bleed until it becomes red; and similarly if you find it thick, then let it bleed until it becomes thin; and similarly if it's sharp, let its sharpness be contained within.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And indeed for that which is full and strong and needs the extraction of blood in an incision, let the phlebotomy on the vein be extended, and let the phlebotomist be long.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for that which is pale, let the opposite happen to that; and indeed, let you extract him in many punctions, and let it be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of veins is a cross section, not an incision.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy saves from blood flow and injury to nerves, and it is better and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And at which it is accustomed to occur fainting, you should perform phlebotomy, and indeed cure that beforehand with a small amount of paste infused in water from mint or simply scratched apple cider vinegar; and extract blood from the patient in three punctions or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is warmed up by compaction, then before phlebotomy take an infusion of myrrh or of flavored honey water with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or of a fragrant and aromatic syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs, you should perform phlebotomy, and it is the cause of his blood flow, so indeed let him drink water from meat and flavored syrup very subtle; and use aromas in that, and limit his feet by that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes we've mentioned in the division for treatment of fainting through evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wishes to empty his arm and dissolve his blood in another punction, for the phlebotomy is for evacuation through punctions, and the virtue of him being cold, that drains the blood little by little, so it depends on the quantity of its virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And whoever wishes to empty his arm and warm up his blood in another session, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And whoever wishes to draw blood from his body against the direction it usually flows, indeed do this on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	And that body in which there is already drained and sharp blood causing fever, indeed do this by extracting it in one punction and a large amount of it, so extend the incision until you encounter fainting; because all conditions for phlebotomy should be retained. And let your hand rest on the patient's wrist to prevent death instead of fainting, as multiple punctions require this when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And indeed when you wish to remove the arm and drain blood in a second session, as soon as you close the opening of the vein and make it difficult to drain blood, press underneath that with vigor and slightly bend it outwards, for this is too harsh.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Let it rest until you are able to perform phlebotomy again; or keep this with the sharpness of the phlebotomist who is coagulating blood in the opening of the vein; or place over that with thorn extract, or antiseptic, and press gently there while the blood is out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is swollen, then smooth it out and don't touch it until the swelling subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary to provoke the body to evacuate the contents according to its need, and this is not a refusal, then you apply pressure there on that spot or on another arm at another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "muscle of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the saphenous or the basilic, when they are not present or are hidden, which is made up of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient dips their hand in hot water until the easy reddening occurs and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then strengthen it over that with lye and a narrow constriction; and then perform phlebotomy according to the transverse small line, not laterally nor longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make your incision wide and perform your phlebotomy at that over the joint of the hand, just a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of the blood is prohibited, then you should immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	May it be that if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the immersion of your hand in hot water, and similarly during winter, keep the body of blood warm in hot water.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is saved that among all other veins, for you do not have a pulsating vein or nerve on it.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the wrist artery of the right hand is related to the ailments of pregnancy.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the phlebotomy for this person is to strengthen your hand with lye or with your own hand, since you have it submerged in hot water, while the vein swells and is shown by pressure; then perform a transverse phlebotomy there; and if you incise that all over it would not bleed.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And remember to not end your hand at the phlebotomy, for you have there the nerves of the fingers bare of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood flow through there; if you do not immerse that area in hot water, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, which prevents any flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And like it is extracted the blood according to the quantity of need, then you press over the vein with oil and salt, so that it does not solidify clot-like; similarly make it in every branch straight.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	May the youth of the phlebotomy of that on the left hand be related to the ailments of the womb.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do it similarly with the phlebotomy for this as you have done with the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the youth of the saphenous vein phlebotomy is related to ailments that are in the lower parts of your body, similarly to mother's ailments, and retention of menses, as well as ailments of the thighs and old sores on legs and ancient ailments, having similar symptoms to them.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the phlebotomy for this person is that the patient dips their palm in hot water and performs friction until the veins appear; they place a bandage over the joint of the hand. The location of the vein you should identify based on your instructions, and from there its branches run through the surface of the hand.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And thus perform phlebotomy on the larger branch or leave the cushion where you should add the increase of it, which is better and with more salt.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform phlebotomy there on the surface of the hand, then you protect from the nerves that are left there on the surface of the hand, and place your phlebotomy where you perform it across, just as if you were to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And may your phlebotomies be successful.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	May it be that if the outflow of blood is prohibited, then you should immerse your hand in hot water and let the blood flow through there until it can be evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist misses in the first attempt, then try with another phlebotomy on its side where there is salt; and do not fear from it being painful, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly perform for the saphenous vein on the other hand equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, as we have said, you should leave where there is a cavity at the exit of the wild part.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the youth of the phlebotomy for this person is about the pain in the hip when it's due to blood poisoning.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the phlebotomy for this person is that the patient enters into bath water and quickly strengthens their forearm from their elbow up to the knuckles on one long and thin bent hand, which does not appear otherwise.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you perform phlebotomy on that according to each organ that is within your capability and according to the transverse method, which is better; or you incise that by incision or bleed that by bleeding, where there is salt.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	It occurs in thick men more often; and if you find it, but it doesn't show by touch alone, then perform phlebotomy on some branch of it, and that is the one that appears between the two hands behind the mentioned auricular and annular.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And protect yourself from nerves, let blood flow in the vein as much as you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And loosen the constriction and place your hand at the location of the phlebotomy incision point, strengthen that area, so that it heals slightly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	From suction and the quality to use those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Suctions are from cups, or from leeches, or from blood.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And suction is done in two ways: one of them is incision and blood extraction, and the other is suction after incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this suction that follows incision is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the suction that is given after incision and blood extraction are administered at 14 locations in the body, of which the one where suction cups are placed is the navel, and it is the last part of the head; and the middle location between the two parts of the chest is each side of the chest; and suction near the mouth leaves the jaw further from the mouth; and suction on the two spatulas; and suction at the anus, which is above the pubis; and suction for two fires, and they are about an arm's length apart; and suction with two needles, and they are about a hand's width apart; and suction in the two armpits; and suction of the thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And suction does not take out the blood, but only from small veins scattered in the flesh, so it does not have the effect of those, just like when performed through phlebotomy; nor should suction be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused by being filled up inside that the body is completely emptied.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If it is necessary to perform suction due to illness or continuous pain, administer that at the beginning of each month and at the end of it, in the middle of it and at any other time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	This is the cause for which men are affected, when blood multiplies within them because of extraction through suction and they find it serious and sour; and for those who find themselves full and distress in their face and head, and in their chest; and for those who feel pressure on their face and forehead and darkness and confusion in their eyesight; and for those whose location of suction is lost; and for those whose laughter is multiplied; and for those who find a taste of blood in their mouth, or their tongue becomes red and spits out blood; and for those whose sleep is multiplied, and for those who feel pain from blood during sleep, itching, bruises, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it happens in any of those causes, and especially if it's towards the end or middle of the month, then it is commanded that suction be performed as soon as more than a day or three hours have passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And youth for neck suction is when it causes heaviness in the head and to that which settles into the eyes; but rather, that it corresponds to the evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this suction is performed at the phlebotomy site on the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not written that one should use this for someone who experiences overfilling, or in the case of a catarrh, which can cause great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And because of this, it is not recommended to use that on the elderly, and in the cases where there are illnesses affecting the head.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And to those who continue over it on them is made forgetfulness; and because of this, you should warn the suction operator that they should keep their hand close but not touching with a small space at the suction cup when it's done, fearing for the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Suction of alcohol is performed at the phlebotomy site for the dark vein and the basilic vein: and thus it causes asthma, constriction in the lung, and division of its membrane, coughing, and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is known that the alcohol suction should be left for a short time, for if it's removed, it causes weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the suction of arnica causes accidental pain in the head and eye infections, migraine, and reddening of the eyes, and toothaches; and this is performed at the phlebotomy site for the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it is known that you should command the suction operator not to press their hand too hard during incision so as not to puncture an artery and allow blood flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And leaving the suction on the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, and decay of gum tissue, and it manifests like diseases that are in the mouth, and this is done at the phlebotomy site for the aliheric which is located in both cheeks.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And the suction that is performed on the two spatulas causes scalding heat, which is caused by overfilling with warmth.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the suction performed inside both sides of the fire tools causes youthfulness akin to phlebotomy from three veins, which are the basilic, dark and cephalic veins. That one draws blood from all those veins that are scattered throughout the body, as well as the small veins within the larger veins where the suction reaches all three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the suction operator not to proceed in incision, where the place is stripped of flesh, and leave your hands on its nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And this suction is performed over anal fissures and causes hemorrhoids in the anus and ulcers, leaving them as they are.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And command the suction that it be a large vacuum, and one made of iron, as what place needs strong drying; and have him use fine, forceful suction with subtle tools, and he should perform incisions in the manner of incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Decrease the vacuum on the legs through an evident reduction, which pulls out the disease from all parts of the body, and helps to bring old complaints in the lungs and liver, and of the bladder; and they cause menstruation, and help to relieve urination and other conditions; and they are located at the place of venous puncture for two small veins, and phlebotomy, and for two cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	But motion weakens all parts of the body and causes fainting in men during movement.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the suction, to increase youth is equivalent to increasing the suction of two thighs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the suction is to place the vacuum at the beginning view and continue for a while until the juice is cooked, and do not prolong the position of the suction, rather pause those slightly, then let them cool down gradually, and ensure that the humors come into play equally.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this until you see the place already turn red and swell, and that the manifestation of the disease appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you perform incisions and repeat the juice little by little, and consider in the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	That person who has thin rare flesh, it is advisable to perform one incision and not more, so that the place does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the suction operator to expand the incision slightly and stop there, always keeping the juice available for use.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the disease becomes thickened, it is advisable that you perform two incisions; in the first incision, open the pathway for subtle removal to the disease and its moisture.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second, through thorough examination, you obtain the extraction of the thickened disease.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the disease is very dense, it is then that a third incision should be made for it to reach the end.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And gradually, when we want to extract some of the disease little by little or a small amount, until it reaches one incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want extraction of thick disease, we perform incisions in a more forceful manner; and if we know that the disease is thick, then it's advisable to perform wave-like incisions.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of the incision is at the depth of the canal only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the canal is thick, hard, dark, and his veins are tight, it's advisable that the points of the suction be softer, more open, more resolved; in summer time, like oil from aloes or oil from violet, or oil of lemon leaves, or oil from cinnamon; and in winter months, such as oil from narcissus, or oil from iris, or oil of chamomile, or that similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the abundance is thick, hard, then let the oil be of calendula, or oil from balm, or oil from aloes, or oil of coriander, and that similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the suction operator has ample veins with thin flesh, it's advisable that oil be prohibited for them, and ensure that near the area of suction the points of the suction devices are rinsed with water or with hot water from solatrum, or with water from cinnamon, or with water from lemon leaves, and similar near those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that one whose disease has a moisture content, washes his suction points with vinegar, or with water from myrtle and sumac, and similar near those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for that one whose excesses are thick, wash his suction points with old vinegar, or with water of sunc, which is marjoram, or from decoction of coriander, or chamomile, and similar near those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it's advisable for the suction to be kept in front of bathing; and it's advisable that it be taken close to the shower for an hour or two, and ensure sleep near the suction.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is necessary is that the blood-letting tool be kept in front of bathing before suction.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And consider at the beginning: if the suction operator or the one who is due for phlebotomy has anger and heat over their disease's inflammation, it's advisable that they take cooling causes, such as sorrel vinegar, endive with vinegar and lettuce, and secalinum, and julep, and similar.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause with their meats such as chicken, cooked rabbits, and meat seasoned with herbs, and similar for them.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for that one whose complexion is hard, it's advisable for them to drink essences of almond oil or essence of secalinum from seeds, sumac, and vinegar mixed with a bit of both old and new; and it should be advised for them to limit their drinking and eating, and pause meats like chicken, rabbit, peas, small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it's advisable that the amount of drink during days of suction and phlebotomy be greater than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it's advisable to give in drinking for some hours before a Tyrolean alpharac, or medicinal substances of musk (which is muscat), or alum in front of suction or in front of phlebotomy or close by, so that the main parts are comforted and the disease becomes subtle; do not advise taking that type of castile soap.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Let the incisions that are cuts be made parallel to the fold of the stomach and on the belly, and around gout, and on the umbilicus, at the places of joints, and across the waistband, for these members do not suffer from cuts on themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	It is not to be done through those (cuts) but as a puncturing of the muscle, like suction cups over nipples in gout due to the flow of blood in the body; we use that method for it to dissolve the excess air, similar to making incisions on the abdomen and umbilicus; because that hardens the body part and soothes it, resolving the pain that accompanies this excess air.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And when it is made on the elbows if they occur or bend, for by the force of puncturing one becomes strong and removes the bending from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	Similarly, when it is made on the stomach and belly, you relieve air in those confined areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These suction cups are administered several times with oil alone; some are also administered with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Some of these punctures are filled with hot water in stomach maladies.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	This is why the suction cup must be full and contain large pus, so it is hot water alone or water in which herbs appropriate for this purpose have been steeped.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of suction cup administered with heat: let the size of the opening be that of two fingers, according to how we have made it; and the amount of coagulum is that of a palm; and at its base, in the place where it's at the circuit, that length of it, the tube should be small according to the amount that enters it with one needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	A make is done using elderberry or citrus, large peels, lion's, equal and smooth ones so that it does not hurt the body part when its position over it should be.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And at the midpoint of the cross-section of elder or iron, where a candle is placed above the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this is that large suction cup compared to the one we have described; and the small amount of it according to stomach ailments and the condition of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And suckers for children and those in exhaustion are different from suckers for young people and with large crosses.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of making this suction cup on the body is to extend the firewood in front of a small candle made of beeswax, and place that over the midpoint of the cross-section at the center of the suction cup, so that the fire be lit near your hand以免烧伤患儿的胸部.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it should be placed on the body part of the patient, and you should use as we have said, within which when we have the suckers and do not need to show off this method that boils over that tube, then the suction cup shall soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And according to its nature, heat the firewood, and repeat this process if you need more of it.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Let it be known that the suction cup to be used in gout due to pressure, with water, without cross-sections or tubes, is administered only when filled with water and is placed on the body part alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this suction cup the larger it is, the better it is, so that it can receive large quantities of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter/Capital XC VII (Roman numeral for 97)
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in moist body parts but in those body parts where there's no position for suction cups, because of their smallness, like the liver and gum tissue or similar to them; or on a bare flesh member, as described and similar ones.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting devices in the water bubbles of cooked oils.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And it should be laid out for a day and night in cooked oil water until they become soft, without breaking any cause within those; and it should be emptied of the body during meals with leeches and suction cups; and it should be rubbed on the patient's body until you see redness; and it should be placed over them.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled up, then.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if oil from that place can be used with suction cup, it's better in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And otherwise, then wash the place with vinegar and add hot water; and rub it and press it out.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body of blood extends to the location of the leeches, and this is what's left over, then you place a cloth in cold water, and put that on top so that it absorbs the residual.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle over it sulfurized vitriol, or gall and similar substances from the收敛剂 causes, until the blood coagulates; or they are placed on the place of the strong powders of cooked peas, and they are left until the peas adhere to the place, and the blood is coagulated.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, repeat the use of leeches, when it's possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is prohibited from suspension, then rub the place with recent blood or leave a needle in those places where it boils blood; and they should be left, as soon as you feel any blood coming out.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want it to stop, grind a little bit of saffron powder, or salt, or ashes on those, and put the cauldron there immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the section on restoration therapy: for recovery.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter contains necessary instructions in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, realize that many doctors and laymen, and those who for years will neglect the works of the Ancients or fail to read even one letter from them, use this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the scholars on Earth is kept private; I have not forgotten anything during these times and I did not include everything I heard. Instead, I drew from the works of the Ancients through lengthy reading and study of their understanding in order to extract the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And further, direct yourself towards experimentation and study throughout my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have described in this chapter all of my science and what has been experimented by me; thus, I abbreviate this for you others and release it from the occupation of lengthening; and abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and demonstrate it at the end of declaration; and form it into various shapes of the storms that are administered there, just as I did in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from the existence of bone fractures, from which it is necessary to start before we begin recalling bone fractures and their various types for each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Let us therefore declare what is said in the preamble of this chapter, which are summaries of speech; and these chapters, those understood by craftsmen at the beginning to clarify the truth of these matters, are for you and those who already know or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And let us say that when an accident happens to a bone fracture or dislocation or twist or entanglement occurs, then you must consider at the beginning with bloodletting or alleviate that area, or any other time, if no cause is prevented, such as excess of humor, or the one to which this happens is elderly, or in weakness, or it's time for strong heat, or strong sweating.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let it be satisfied with food consisting of herbs and venison and crabs; and forbid large meats and fill only with foods and all foods that fill the veins of the blood, within which you ensure the absence of pus in the wound, and if you do not fear the leakage of matter to the body.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their normal position according to which their custom is.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the broken bone begins to be restored, let the patient be fed with nutritious foods rich in nutrients and heavy and dense, such as wheat cooked in water, rice, carrots, potatoes, meat from cows, nuts, fresh fish, large meats similar to those, and following this routine, there is a coagulation of pus in the fracture slightly thickened and milky.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And realize that bones shrink when they are in the young people and in those who are old, it is not possible for them to continue shrinking according to their nature by drying out their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continue according to their nature all the time by drying out those limbs, and they are continued and consolidated those that are in them at the end of growth, such as the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and allows for any cause similar to lard in which excess accumulates that adheres and strengthens it internally where it becomes glutinous over time, within the periods of gluing together and settling periods, during which they reach the end of strength and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, within which no cause prevents it from performing its tasks.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the foods of the patient, foods that are heavy, viscous and density, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	A variety of fractures according to the diversity of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fracture are various according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture in the bone of the knee is different from a fracture in the skull bone; and the fracture in the foot bone is different from the fracture in the two bones; and similarly all other limbs are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I conclude with a recall of every species of fracture, detailed in its own chapter separately from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A variety of fractures internally.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	A variety of fractures in the bones themselves; one is made into an arched fracture another that happens within its star. And some are made to form fractures according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the skull and stars and additions or non-additions, as when preparation for writing takes place, it results in a fracture with scratch and breakage on the head, and is a small crack fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for every species, there is an appropriate storm in its restoration according to which the recall of it will be distinct in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this reason, bone fracture is known by its sign: it is the curvature of it, and the feeling of its prominence and attachment to the pain, and when you press it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no obvious curvature in the place nor should you apply pressure to your finger when touching the bone during pressure, if the patient does not experience significant pain, then it's not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It may be possible that there is curvature or a small crack, so when you touch my hand with your own and during compression of all, pause on them for the duration of the moments in which you remember those medicines; and then stretch it through subtle constriction afterwards.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	Know that if the location is curved and does not split into two or anything else that doesn't happen in its stomach, when it swells the whole part of its body; then touch where you start to correct the duration that it happened until the appearance of pus with a cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if pus appears in it, then smooth that for several days until the pus ceases; and then adjust that according to any method you can of elevation and ingenuity.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	Know that the restoration of your body and the adjustment of your illness is a slight elevation from the bone in which it occurs internally.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen that according to the memory of your condition.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If in the bone there are stomach issues, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, if it's a hand or a foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And if your position is where you pause the member in place according to its natural figure, while spreading out the parts of the broken limb, then make it so that you perform returning those additions with ingenuity and according to any method you can apply in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard yourself so that it doesn't occur to the patient during your operation on them or injury, and perform according to your ability that you apply one bone to the other in its companion according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And touch that with your hand in that moment, and if you notice any different cause here, correct it and adjust it according to the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as some foolish doctors cause the appearance of pus with their operations or cause compression in the limb like what we have seen through their operations on them.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And connect, find balance and maintain a decent operation and constriction of that member, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and tell them not to touch or manipulate it during their vigil or sleep, observe their movements, assess their strength, consider all their actions with your entire virtue; and wait until the position of the limb is in a position where pain is assuredly relieved, which cause being when felt during the arrangement of the position of the member itself. Then make you change that to another position of that one from which they do not feel pain; and watch so that the position of this one that was changed remains straight and even, for then the restored limb will not acquire any curvature.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the stopped member is as I have described; know that broken members vary in their size and in their magnitude, and in the shape of those ones.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small like the arm and the other ones and similar to them, then make sure that the wrapping is of a soft, fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	For those that are large like the thigh or chest, make sure there is a firm and hard wrap, so that with the application of strength to the large member from all sides in balance, so that no mark appears within it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And proceed to start, your operation for balancing, pause comfortably in that manner, on the site of that fracture with three wraps or four according to the member needed; and strengthen your hand a little on the ligament.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And proceed to go to that part above the site of the fracture, and strengthen more so as not to cause your constriction on which you have strengthened the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And proceed to lengthen the wrap on the site of the fracture just a little bit, and soften the constriction gradually while taking from that site a large portion.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And take another branch and cover that other area around the broken limb with a wrap, then proceed to go towards the wraps to the part above the fracture; and if your operation is in the constriction of the wrap and in softening it as we have said in the first wrapping on top.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And between the wraps of the stopping cloth or fabric, pause so that the curvature of the fracture is equalized if there's a curvature in it; otherwise, do not pause for any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And pause on the other branch, and then adjust over these neatly made stars for a while, if there is no inflammation or pus in this area; then pause where that pus was and where bone causes inflammation; leave it for several days; then strengthen on those stars.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the stars be of cane's length, and shaped wisely; or made from wood; or from palm leaves; and let each star have this size and this shape:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	And yet ensure that the star placed over that fracture is much larger in size than the other stars and has a length according to its magnitude and size as it would be when reading from the limb. And then strengthen on the stars with another branch following your first constriction; and adjust on top in an even manner as we have said about constriction, and let your constriction be more towards the location of the fracture than that, and the longer you extend the fracture, the less the constriction.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And consider that the threads be finer in pregnancy and subtlety, and be of his many; and if the threads are thick, like I have seen during several operations by tying up some of his heart cords, this is a great mistake, when causing equality outside the constriction.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And thin threads are not convenient, for you will not achieve what you want with them in terms of constriction, and do not consider that between each thread there is space as wide as a finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is laid out so that their extremities are close to the constriction near the sensitive areas on the feet, then place some leather or woven wool under them so that it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some broken bones are afflicted by disease, and there's disruption in the sequence, and I will recall this in that manner at the court according to uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not all broken members are bound with stars on the first day; this cause is that when the limb, if it's large, cannot place pressure on your stars but approximately three to seven or more days later, depending on how sure you are of the occurrence of an abscess cautery.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of the plastering techniques that the ancients used to restore, which are applied over fractures, dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The method of plastering like a brief restoration of fractures, suitable for complex injuries and more so to women and children, which is that you take powder of mill stone, it's the essence of the flour that comes from the movement of the grain in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And do it this way instead, if not, sift that with egg white, and prevent the formation of that non-thin or subtle; then use that accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for treating bone fractures, dislocations, and twists: prepare a mixture of asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, rue, and myrrh, which is finely ground into one thousand grains, all totaling one pound. Take five parts myrrh and twenty parts aloes; take twenty parts alcoholic vinegar or hen's egg white if the patient is delicate; then prepare this ointment with these ingredients in proper composition and restores broken bones slightly, giving strength to old men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of plastering which helps with fractures and twists: prepare a mixture of myrrh and white alum, one pound; myrrh and crocus root, five pounds; acacia, six pounds; Armenian bark, twenty pounds.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All of them are ground in a mortar on the wound, they are sifted, and mixed with water or egg white and it should be administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	The method for plastering joints and bones separated from their places, and pain accidents in those and cracks and fractures: take surgical thread wool and immerse it in vinegar and oil of turpentine, then place it on the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this plastering, there is not just restoration power, but it expels abscesses and truly relieves pains.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plastering that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all together to make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	The brief method of plastering to be administered for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of the remaining abscess: take ground almond paste, chamomile flowers, violet petals, flour from poppy seeds, all in equal parts. All of them are ground and mixed with vinegar if the limb is not injured.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	And if it's injured, then do this with water from aloe or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method for plastering that promotes faster resolution than the first, when there is an abscess lasting to restore the limb: use ground almond paste, lime seeds, borage, red clover, basil, chamomile flowers, all in equal parts; everything should be ground and mixed with water from artichoke or with double-strength water or with vinegar, according to the quality of the limb and the color of its rest.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Ypocras does not allow free use of oil or vinegar on the broken limb for its restoration, instead recommends making a salve of beeswax and oil and not any other cause; it is advised to have it at an intermediate level between thickness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Yew Gualia is seen to be used by placing it on the broken limb for its restoration and among the causes in which small dryness from heat quality are thus such as myrrh, ashes and resemble those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method to bandage and soothe injuries and pain: take equal parts of powdered flesh from slaughtered pigs or horse's buttocks, as well as powdered white chalk and salt; grind them equally, sift them, make them into a poultice.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	Decide the quantity according to how much pus is being produced and if it's not increasing, you consider if there is no pain or pressure, nor has any bone been broken; then you do not change your treatment for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is severe pain, pressure or inflammation at the site, then you should treat or change that immediately, and keep this patient's bandage in place.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take flax and a sponge that's soaked in sea water, immerse this in hot water, then wash the affected area with it until the pain and discomfort subside; and let the limb rest for an hour. Then lay on woolen cloth submerged in vinegar and oil or rubbed oil over it, cover this up overnight, until you're sure there is no pus pocket, and that the swelling of the limb has subsided, as well as alleviating the pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that fine strip again and make small bandages not to restrict your first constriction too much, and gently apply it until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And when you notice that the pus and the pressure as well as the pain and swelling have all been reduced completely, and you need neither bandage nor constriction, then continue with this treatment as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if nothing happens to the limb for any reason as we have said, then do not change this until at least three, four, five or seven days; And some of these treatments will be left for up to twenty days according to your observation of the progress in healing the limb as we've said, until the fracture sticks together and the flesh starts to coalesce on that area.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the bandage more than your first bandage entirely, and adjust according to the thickening of the patient's meat, as their recovery progresses.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	And if you notice that the fracture is already dry and more withered than bleeding, then you know that the nourishment cannot reach there; therefore, you should clean it with vinegar water every day; this must be done for three days in total. Then slightly relax the bandage, allowing some of the nutrition to reach the area through this operation, so that healing starts gradually.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	And if the limb restorers do this for those who fracture their limbs again after not recovering at first, as they bleed and then recover according to their curvature, it's an error according to their operation method; there is great fear. If a surgeon did enlarge these Ancients in their free works and healed with this operation.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this; therefore, it is more reasonable that this does not happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Second chapter: About fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are impacts and their figures vary, with distinct causes. Some fractures occur due to impact from space, where the impact stays within the skull, leaving the bone intact, similar to what happens in a stick, for this reason, this type is called 'ascial'. Or the space strikes some part of the bone and cuts into the flesh without going through its rear; this kind of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the damage from these two types of fractures is either severe or minor. For friction or impact fractures, their cause is impact against stone or hitting on stone, similar to them.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture penetrates nearly to the brain, leaving the bone intact. Or it occurs in the bone's face, and the damage from these two types of fractures is either severe or minor.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And for the fracture that grows in the bone, in its subtle strength similar to a hair's thickness, thus this type of fracture is called 'capillary'.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And the fracture is made by hitting or from impact of stone, which results in some layers of bone entering the parts inside, and it occurs at the concave location, similar to what happens when logs are hit causing their entry into the parts inside during wood processing.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This is mostly done in moist bones, such as children's heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these species of fractures, they are heavy like separate stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will revisit the healing process in its location.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we know all these species of fractures through diagnosis on them and by examining the affected flesh that has gone bad.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is known because it's discovered over the bone, it's washed off, and its limit is determined by feeling around it, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider the patient's condition, and then if you observe these symptoms as clear signs on the body, such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of understanding, abscess formation, fainting, acute fever, nosebleeds and pressure, and similar symptoms in major conditions, you may conclude that it is not healing.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you observe unusual symptoms, you hope for recovery; then you begin the treatment of the patient.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	This cause is that if it has come to you the inflammation as it inflames and this happens in the days of winter, then conclude that you study in the anatomy before the twelfth day according to every disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the days of summer, then conclude that you examine or finish studying in front of the seventh day, having understood that whatever has affected the anatomy is corrupted by the heat, and accidents occur as we have recounted.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the heart penetrating the brain, and is in small parts spreading, then conclude that you should incise the part indicated and rub it, according to what I will instruct you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you examine the head of the patient inflamed, and uncover over the anatomy according to custom and method as possible for you according to the appearance of the inflammation, and it should be gentle on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you have detected the bone, pus or abscess flow, then you oppose yourself to it in such a way that you will know how to handle it, and you will fill the area with scented cloths soaked in vinegar and rubbed oil, and make the patient rest with the inflammation inside until the abscess is numbed; and be sure of the blood flow; and proceed around the bone and in the excision of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And it should be done according to one of two ways of operating.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the first way is that you incise the bone with a straight incision tool, and this is its form: And then administer another incision tool of this, slightly shorter than that one; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more of this incision tool that is wider than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should know that there are several types of incision tools which have some that are wider than others; and among them, some are shorter than the others, they have their tip ends in a finer state and are made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease when striking against the incision tool, to ensure that you do not cut the head and damage it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then conclude that you should puncture in front of its circuit before administering the incision tools on its surface, which are called shallow tunnels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called so only when those do not reach the end of the bone test until it is close to it, whereby at the tunnel the tip or margin near that which makes your head seem sharp like a margin or small circle, one must prevent it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient for you to take a large number of these tunnels each of which fits the thickness of each bone, within which there is an end of which is sharp, the amount in length and width should be according to the thickness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of tunnels: The quality of puncturing in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the tunnel on the bone and twist it with your fingers until you know that the bone has penetrated; then move the tunnel to another location, and let that be between all taken out material having the thickness of the ray or around that.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you incise with the tools between each piece of bone you have taken out, and make that fine pus over it so as to lift lightly, just as we said, while you remove the bone or with your hand, or for some other reason through certain instruments you may have prepared for this, such as tongs and delicate forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And it should be understood that you must exercise great caution so that the incision tool does not touch any part of the anatomy.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have punctured the bone and separated it from the anatomy if it continues with that, and you extract it, then understand and equalize it in the roughness of what is in the bone as another tool similar to an incision tool but however understand that it should be more refined and more delicate than other incision tools.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you find any small or soft part of the bones, then take that with ease using your tools; and proceed to heal the wound with linens and ointments as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other way of operating is gentle and far from pain, which Galen described through great praise; this is what it's about: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the area where the fracture is more intense and more evident. Once you have uncovered that part and placed its tip over this incision tool, this is how it should be:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And this is that the conical part is strong and does not incise any cause, while the sharp part is at both sides in length before it, thus; so the conical part should be adjusted to the anatomy on the side where its inclined sharp edge meets the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike upon the incision tool of a part within which you make an easy incision through all the bone as it has been twisted, and you are sure of the heat that it does not occur in the accident that you fear in any way. And if the surgeon was the most sick person among all people and the least knowledgeable about them; certainly, and if he was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When touching any associated cause in the bones of the small leg at certain bone locations, that agent will enter through his hand to the tip of the cutting tool that is circular, and withdraws it from him easily, which is withdrawn from his injury and his pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the small leg, and what is detached or left in the bone is the skin of him, and it enters him with roughness and fine scars, then carve that roughness out and remove those tiny spots using thin tools that you have prepared, with different quantities so that it is possible for you to administer some from each location according to which suits them best and drain the pus of those according to where you are cutting the broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And when administering according to your judgment, make cuts in the beginning of each piece of bone where you drain out the pus from those cuts, and roughly use near his delicate pus. Do not cease performing this until you have administered both the thick pus and the delicate pus from all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	For any other small cuts or subtle fractures, make sure to administer care according to how you would correct it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And this is the reason that not all of those who have studied in that art will be skilled at it.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have shown on what we wrote, demonstrating large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the small leg is injured when you drain out the bone, then when you have assessed the size of the injury, take cloth according to its quantity and immerse it in a well-tanned oil, then place it over the wound's opening; moreover, take another folded or tripled cloth, immerse it in vinegar and well-tanned oil, and place it on top of the first cloth. Carefully spread this dressing over the wound, without causing pressure that could harm the tissues; furthermore, apply a layer of fat over this, and do not tighten it unless it matches the size of the wound only.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it under this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of pus coming out; then remove it and apply medicines that help with excessive drying, such as flaxseed, rice flour, powders of ashes and aristolochia, and powders suitable for these.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And make sure to apply these medicine powders finely ground over the wound when they are dry. Generally, administer all medicines with properties that cleanse without causing irritation or biting effects.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And follow your judgment in caring for the wound during your treatment; it should not be left with ointment residue or any other substance. Do not let impurities accumulate on it; when applied to the thigh of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons that area, leading to this malignancy spreading into the body.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it spreads into the brain tissue when it affects him, especially if his treatment is neglected. If you observe a dark color on its surface; then consider this: when accidents occur in the body that we have mentioned, realize that all is corrupted there.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if no dark color appears, but only the color of the medicine left on it, due to the properties of that medicine causing that darkness, then take honey and well-tanned oil in equal parts (three parts). And mix them with a cloth, then place that over the brain; and later apply treatment with the remedies suitable for healing until it recovers.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Chapter III: Restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is broken not just by the two parts of it coming together, or because one or some of those have been pushed out, due to there being bones in it. The part you leave behind is cartilaginous and undamaged; it doesn't affect him but causes swelling, twisting, and curvature.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then when you insert your small finger into his nose, adjust that fracture internally according to your finger's indication, and outside of it too. Perform this until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this with ease and ensure that you don't allow your operation's pressure to affect the body as a whole.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the top part of the nose's outer segment, and your finger doesn't reach that area, then when you have assessed its thickness at its widest point, adjust it there.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then perform this gesture:
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And help him with the restoration of his nose on the first day after the fracture, if it's possible; otherwise, wait until at least seven to ten days have passed since the pus has stopped coming out.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And when inserting into the tip of the nose a piece of cloth or two bandages, depending on whether it's one part fractured or two parts. Place them so that they fill up as much as your thumb can fit inside the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And I refer to the methods of old restorers who enveloped the bandages in wax, having them stay on throughout the day but not being seen by me; rather, when you place a cloth soaked with bird's egg white and powdered moly inside, let it remain until the bone is set and the cartilage becomes hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes inflammation enters the nose, instead of blood, fear of an infection that wraps around the patient like a lion's cloth; and if already there is a violent nasal pus and the patient is unable to inhale.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this reason is not necessary for you; if you wish, do this, and if you wish, do bloodletting.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another infection occurs in the wound, cover your nose with a wet cloth or with oil-soaked cotton wool, or with vinegar.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if no infection occurs in the wound, then cover it with sifted safflower flour and powdered cinnamon; and place your hand on their foot as if you were pressing on it, and do not allow them to touch their nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken or they have been damaged, then cover it so that you split over those, and extract them with instruments suitable for those; and then take care of the wound, using what promotes healing and consolidation, and apply bandages as is appropriate.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if an infection occurs inside the nose, then cover it so that you treat that with bloodletting and administer lead pipes into which everything is healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Regarding the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw has been broken and its fracture is not contaminated by pus, observe that if the fracture is only outside, and is not cracked into two parts but bent towards inside, then his understanding is slight.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And thus, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index in the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right jaw, then insert that index of your right hand. And push outwards the elasticity of the internal fracture towards outside with your other hand from the outside part of the mouth; do this properly on both sides equitably.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then cover that you administer extension of both parts according to rightness while it's possible for his equilibrium.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a commotion of teeth leading to disruption, then strengthen those that you expect will break into gold or silver or clay; and place your hand over the broken jaw with a wet cloth, and place another cloth underneath it, and a large star-shaped patch decently made, or one person equal in length to the jaw; and place that on top as long as you understand their perspiration and that suits the application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be calm, and stop feeding them lion's delicacies.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that it has been altered in some way, then you take and untie those on the third day; and then correct whatever has already been altered from them, apply that with powdered moly, with egg white, or with sifted almond flour, since you have stopped using their lion's food, and place your hand over the plaster cloth.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then when this plaster is properly applied to them, and the position of the mouth is not altered, leave it alone, do not untie it until it heals and strengthens the fracture; for how long will this inflammation last for three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another inflammation occurs in bloodletting, then administer what we have said about the inflammations while it heals, and let that pus be reformed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is contaminated with pus, then consider whether it's a piece of bone that has separated or is stuck, then you should delicately apply those stuck to what suits for their removal from the disturbances.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wounds of the pus are straightened, then you should expand it with a bloodletting tube according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have stopped those pieces being stuck, and if that pus is not reforming again, then cover that hole of the wound if it's wide; and otherwise, place one of the plasters you suit for that and consolidate that area until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Regarding the restoration of the hyoid bone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The inflammations are that the hyoid bone of the front part has been broken due to the muscles, and this fracture is made in three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Or it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts other than those that do not come off stuck together; and this is easier for restoring it; or if there are sticking pieces in them, then it makes the restoration difficult; or if the fracture is contaminated with pus.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And for that operation when the fracture is contaminated with pus, you must have two ministers present, so one holds the assistant and follows the broken hyoid bone, and the other extends the neck collar to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then join the fracture with your hands until it is made into its shape according to what you have covered, and do not leave any slight elevation or depression in it.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then cover that you pause on the patient's breath of cloth or wool, and its size according to your need; extend and elevate the hyoid bone and press the lump with your hand until you equalize the fracture according to what you have covered.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the base of the collarbone to the outside parts, as it is hidden in the preon, then guide that part of the patient so that he is leaned back on his neck, and place a cushion slightly above the muscle of him with a medium-sized pillow.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister touches the muscle of him at the points where you have placed them inside so that the bone of the collarbone is elevated as it is in the preon area, and then you correct the fracture and align it according to your previous instructions.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel that the collarbone is displaced and painful, then guide your way as if to cut into that area and remove those displacements with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is stuck in the bone, then you devise an incision from him using one of your scalpels that you have equipped for this task, because you had placed the collarbone slightly towards the center which serves the articulation; and this tool is made of wood or iron and has this shape:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It is similar to a spatula, whose curvature matches this shape. Its width depends on what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or its fragility.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; there should be two ends like before, and one end should be broad while the other is narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when removing the displacement from the bone is wide, and you are sure to have pus at the site, then adjust both edges of the wound for suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small or you fear pus formation, then use the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the wound's cut.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if pus formation occurs, then apply a cloth soaked in vinegar and oil to it, and place it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And if there is a narrowing of the bone when it's a wound and its section, then you place an applied plaster made from corn flour and egg white over that area, and place it on top of your foot. If you lack materials for that, take a vinegar and oil mixture, where the amount should match the size of the wound cut.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And finally, ensure that the table spoon does not obstruct the broken bone; and guide it so that you can see your patient every day. When their muscles are softened or you notice the spoon has hardened again, then correct this and strengthen the healing process.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And adjust your patient's sleep on their neck, making sure they rest with their head slightly raised at night using a small pillow. So that when you place this support under the back of their head, then raising the backrest creates an elevation for the fracture of the collarbone, or if instead, you keep their arms at the side of their body.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the muscle until it heals faster or if pus occurs, within about twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And adjust the plaster again if you have noticed your patient's face improving like that, and correct in the narrowing, restore it and smooth out until it is restored and the collarbone fracture has coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and made comfortable after about twenty-eight days, and in some cases, certain treatments are performed within that period of time.
Capitol .vi.	I am sorry but "Capitol .vi." doesn't seem to translate into English from any of the languages you mentioned (Latin, Italian, Spanish) as it stands alone and appears to contain a mix of Roman numerals and a term that may not have a clear meaning in these languages. Without more context or further sentences connected to this phrase, I am unable to provide an accurate translation. Please consider providing more information about where this phrase is coming from or how it's used in the text you shared earlier.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	"De restauracio de fractura de la spalla" translates to "Regarding the restoration of a shoulder fracture" in English.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula tart is broken at the spot on you and it is not broken from you, but only around its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And so when the spot on you is broken - if it's broken in the middle spot of you - and it can't be known other than by touch, then according to that which makes up the fracture figure, you prepare yourself and reduce it following the natural figure, through all mechanical means possible that suit you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And place on the spot the powder of ground albumen mixed with oil, stop the nose; and place on the spot powdered double cloth; and place on you a strip of table wax paste according to the amount of the spatula or more by just a little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Perhaps if you find that the strip is curved in some of the places of the spatula, then fill that curvature with nose stopper, and return to place the strip according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And strengthen on top with an herbal remedy for elongation and within the constriction of the strip, ensure that it does not exceed its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And examine the ligament on every day; and for each recovery where it has been softened, make another application and strengthen it and equalize the strip if it exceeds its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And have the patient lie on their back so.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and you will know securely that whatever started it from the bones does not tremble nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you are dealing with the site of the bone and place on it the codon, then you divide over you, stop it, and do according to what we have said about the fracture of the cervical vertebra in case an abscess cauterization occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	About the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The leg sometimes breaks in the middle of it and there the spatula must be applied; but its ends must not be crushed or broken.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And about the injuries when it breaks in the middle of you, it tends towards the divisions inside and happens to you great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, weakness, and nausea; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of you is to have the patient lie on their back and place a cushion between your shoulders; and press into your muscles, adjust your ribs against two rib positions, and refine in your operation and in the balance according to all possible means that suit you so that while returning the shape of the bone as it should be.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And place an ointment plaster and stop above it, placing a thin strip of table wax or calx on top, making sure they match in levelness because you cover that with cloth; refine in your adjustment over the broken bone so as not to exceed its place; prepare that according to the smoothness at the back for some days, strengthen that with a tight bandage; and continuously consider the swelling at all times, and when it softens, strengthen that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity compels you to provoke in that disintegration or pressure, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then remove and relieve that and eliminate the plaster, rectify what happens according to your method of treatment; and reduce the plaster if you find that it affects this way; adjust its bandage so that it heals.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	About restoring the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur in small places but only in those that span both; and for their ends from the division at the front, they do not experience this friction against each other except due to their being cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge of it is not hidden from feeling; you must inquire about the patient with these words.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be like this: you align the fracture with your words according to possible means, so that it is swallowed as it should be, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bones with a strip, if you need that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is tending towards the divisions inside, then it happens to the patient with intense pain and puncture, like the puncture that happens in those who have swollen lungs due to water retention; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, nausea and vomiting; and this is hard to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Greeks are made with that in a way of using them internally.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them we say: do this when you eat food from the body that causes inflation and wind, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture be pushed outwards towards the divisions.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	Perhaps we should avoid causing that to not become a minor cause to generate abscess cauterization, if it doesn't happen; and if it already happens, then help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it should be placed on top of the winded area and to press with strength; this is similar to reasoning, but however, there's a concern that the wind will push the surplus towards the place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: do this - have the area covered with wool that is already submerged in oil cauterization, and place powders between the ribs until full, so that the swelling matches when you cover it according to smoothness; and prepare the patient's body for water retention treatment and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if there is intense compression of the patient causing discomfort and piercing pain in punctures, fearing for the patient, then we must cut over that area, expose where the broken rib lies, and place a tool over it. The use of this instrument follows a previous thought process, and with ease, we insert the bones, removing them.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And when adjusting the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and after it has healed, apply bandages until the healing process is complete.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs internally, then you should press and insert powders in olive oil onto the area, and place your hand over it, so that the patient heals with this method which closes to the abscess internally.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And when it is properly turned onto its side on the one where it sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Head chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Regarding the restoration of fractures in the spine of two and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some burns may occur due to fractures in the bones of the neck, and damage to their ligaments, similarly with the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if something like this happens to someone else and you want to know if they will heal or not, then consider it: If their hands are already softened, swollen and dead, unable to move them up or down or strengthen them, when you press those on your fingers or poke those with a needle and don't feel pain there, then know that it is not healing. In the states of dispositions they are fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you find it difficult to move those and feel constriction on pressing them or poking them with a needle, then know that the base of the skull bone is saved and that the patient will recover from this condition.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you observe something similar with the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if they will heal or not, then consider their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And when you notice that they have become softened, observe what happens with those similar to the hands. When you press on their back, they experience warmth and loss of appetite according to their willpower. Sometimes burns are turned onto their back and they want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and thus do not continue with the treatment for them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If no cause of those things does occur, then the cause is better and more minor.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for them is that you perform cauterization of the abscessed area when you place it on the heated oil, or with hot stones. Place some burns on those areas a few times while letting the abscessed area heal during each day until the abscess heals.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the bandages comfortably and remaining, strengthen it on that spot; and order the patient to rest and maintain calmness and not sleep where he finds pain until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that there is dislocation of the cervical vertebra or any cause that has separated from them, then you must operate on the spine and remove that bone; then adjust the two lips of the wound, with stitching if it's large; also cure that with some kind of ointment until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if there is a fracture in the sacrum bone, it's at the end of the spine, then you must insert your right hand's index finger into the anus, and align the broken bone with the other hand according to possible second-order equation; and place a bandage and sandpaper over them, if you need those, and reinforce that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel displaced fractures in them, then you must press on that area, and stay there, and treat the wound with the appropriate treatment until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Regarding the restoration of the collarbone.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the collarbones are broken, and if they break, then there is no communication in the ends of those bones and they are inscribed along their length, declining towards the internal parts; this causes pain at the site and punctures. When it's a fracture, the change (or transformation) becomes numbness.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of them is that you extend your hand over it while it's above the fracture which has the shape of them.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the end of them, then you must align that according to how it's compatible with an equal equation within, so that it resembles its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	And if the fracture is in the long or declines towards the internal parts already, then you must make the patient lie on their abdomen until your preparation for restoring that fracture is ready.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have aligned that, place a bandage over them, and then place the sandpaper of wood or fabric over it, and reinforce with ligation without fear of puncturing the fracture or moving the star.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And align the cavity with that which fills it so that when that accepts the ligature according to equality, command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	And if an abscess occurs and needs cauterization, then you must stop the extension and restoration of them until that abscess is treated, and place what causes it as required. And afterwards, return to the restoration of them and reinforce it accordingly.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it happens in the bones that are dislocated or fractured, then you must treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Restoration of the fracture of the assistant.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The assistant is that which is between the shoulder blade inside the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of him can be done in one of two ways, of which the first you take wood flat on the inside according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And if there are two ends in each extremity are two ligaments, and they should be suspended from the elevated location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And have the patient lie on one side; and then let him throw out his broken arm onto the wood so that it reaches up to the elbow in the middle of which is attached the curvature of the stick.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And suspend above that something heavy, or let the surgeon extend it to the parts left; and then let the doctor examine the broken parts each time; and so that the break returns according to what is required.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other method is that the patient should be rolled on his back and his hand held by the neck ligament; and then instruct two servants to do as follows: one of them holds what is broken down from his hand, while the other keeps his arm in place. And each should extend it towards their own part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then apply strength over the break by ligament and over that one too by another ligament, and let both servants stretch their own parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the break is close to the muscle's extremity, then you should place half of the ligament over the elbow and the other half on the break towards the knee.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the break is close to the knee, then you should place the ligament at that spot and on that knee.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	And apply it with ease and do the work, and as soon as it is equalized according to what is required and applied properly, then strengthen that so as not to cause a carbuncle from the heat.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	And if a carbuncle does occur from the heat, then smooth the constriction on the seventh day, and place on him woolen bandages soaked in vinegar for five days, and insert oil that is rubbed inside until the carbuncle rests, and then apply this.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to strengthen this is to place plaster over the break, and then cover it with a new cloth wrap; and adjust the arm towards the assistant, and place his hand opened on his own muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and apply pressure on the assistant's arm so that the arm is in a star-like position, otherwise you may prohibit some cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use stars.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And that is to place over the break this star which should be more compact and stronger than the other stars; and place between each star a width of your finger, and let the length of the stars according to the breakage increase by three fingers from all parts.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then apply pressure over the stars on this constriction which I mentioned at the beginning of the head.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And your constriction over the location of the break should be more tight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And as much as it gets longer, the constriction becomes smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you locate the position of the stars and constriction as we have said in the time when you restore the limb to its place, then do this.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear a carbuncle from heat, then you should smooth the constriction and the stars for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not occur at the spot of pain or swelling; or let food not reach the limb because of excess constriction; and thus correct all this as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	And if you are worried about preventing any cause of this, then do not loosen the ligature until at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleep be on his back, and his hands be over his stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place on the assistant a full pillow of wool in equal parts, and consider at all times of night or day that the figure of the broken limb should not be disturbed nor dissolved, or that the ligament should be softened; thus correct this altogether according to your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And let the food of the patient follow the order which we have set forth before meals, so that the food should be subtle at first until strength begins to develop; then from this point onwards increase the food for him.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	That the strength of the assistant and his chest is that they should be strong in forty days; then it should be released and given baths and treated with ointments which correct this.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the break is laid out and rubbed, then do not release this ligament and stars until one day or until two months.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol Chapter XII
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Restoration of the fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is composed of two bones which are called the humerus and the ulna; where the small one is called the head and the larger one is placed behind it at the upper part.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And when the arm is broken only the larger bone or the smaller one, and they both break simultaneously.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when it is only the smaller bone that breaks, then its restoration is easy and its healing is easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the bone breaks inside him, you leave his fracture bad, and his healing will be difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And it is worse with that when two bones break at once.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the bone that breaks is the small lower part of the shin, then for the doctor, it's convenient to restore his repair, which should have a small extension in which that can be made equal.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If the shin is large and broken, then create an extension that will hold more firmly.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both shins are broken at once, then prepare for you to make the removal much stronger.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And when you place the shape of your hand, prepare his repair and extend his placement over a cushion, with all else as previously mentioned. Let the auditory part be lower than all others, and let the leg be at right angles to the fallen seat.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of him at the height or angle of his body, so that his leg does not inadvertently move.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And nearby the minister should extend his arm to the part that is more comfortable at his own hand or almost immediately, and another minister should extend similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And nearby the doctor will equalize the bone within that restores it according to the best figure that can be achieved.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are stags in the structure of the bone, then you must reduce all parts to their place with your strength.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears a separate stag that catches the chain and does not allow your hope in his restoration, then you do so on him and stay like that according to the method we have mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is at a disadvantage, I have already addressed this singular case, and therefore take care of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if by chance you encounter an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then cover it with a cloth impregnated with roasted oil and white wax, making it midway between thickness and fineness. Place a strong cloth over that in subtle compression where the abscess can soften; then leave the dressing and apply a plaster made from powder of myrrh on honey, and prepare stars. And let the star be placed above that fracture more accurately and more strongly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of stars on the arm is in the major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one shin or both shins at once.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And place your compression on the site of the fracture firmly and vigorously. When more easily allows the contraction to reach the parts above the fracture or lower parts of him, place the compression a little moist according to when his restoration begins in the introduction of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moist and soft, not hard or prickly. The clay on which it is strengthened should be midway between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and its position for a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there occurs any cause that requires correction, as what usually happens to the limb, then prepare for you to immerse the limb in water so that that pain ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the member not be strained until it rests, and then return your compression.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the contraction has already been softened and the bone has already been restored as before, then correct all that with your strength.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excessive contraction. Then prepare for you to soften that a little and let it rest for a few days until the nourishment flows back there, and then strengthen that again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If to the leg there is not any cause that we have said, then prepare for it not to be discharged within about 20 days or so.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And nearby have the hand of the leg suspended by its strength in movements, and let him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 60 days, or moderately it is restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the composition of tissues and movements positions.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On Restoring Fractures of the Thumb and Fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that fractures occur in the thumb and joints of the fingers, and they do not happen to them except by small movements.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when there occurs a fracture or dislocation in the hand, then prepare for the leg to be lying down and forward of him spread evenly, and nearby place your hand over that stretched out.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And nearby the minister extends the broken bones, and the doctor will equalize those so that they are connected with good congruence.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then prepare to apply plaster and stopper, if there is not an abscess. And nearby place stars according to the amount of the site, and you have already wrapped that in clay cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the break is in the inner parts of the fingers towards the palm's belly, then prepare like a hollow of cloth, and command the leg to strengthen that on his broken palm; nearby it should be strengthened with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the star of copper on the cloth where it floats, so that the copper is applied to the palm; strengthen that according to your preparation.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in external parts, then cover it with two other sticks of the part placed on your palm, so that your hand be opened and straight; and place the constriction, as you would twist your hand like a rope between the fingers firmly.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if the fracture occurs in one of the joints of the fingers, then when you bend it, it should be equal as you cover and proceed to strengthen on your palm; and if you wish, place a small stick straight under him so that the fracture is raised and not crushed.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in other fingers, just like in my middle location or on the index, or on the ring finger, or on the little one, then it should be equal and stable for that finger; or they all are tight as a continuous line, which is better; or place a small stick over that one, as we said earlier about bending.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and close to this, the position of applying a cautery and opposing - during your operation - that which covers when any cause of these occurs, according to what has been recounted about it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of fractures of the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone, when broken, is felt according to its transformation into the part in front and towards the upper pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of him is done so that the muscle becomes strengthened over the fracture and other muscles remain under the fracture, and the patient lies on his stomach and his face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends all the muscle to its part according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	And if it approaches the line of the thigh, then let the muscle approach the front at the part of the femoral head, so that the extension fits into them, and the other muscles remain under the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the break is close to the head, then let the muscle be made close to the head, and have the extension at the parts remaining.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor equalizes the bone among both his hands so that it reduces according to its natural form; and when the bone is connected by good connection; then cover it with a plaster bandage if you don't apply a cautery to the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	And if there is an abscess in him, then you leave it for some days until the abscess from the cautery goes away, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The constriction of him should be done like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and cut off the excess; then wrap the socket until it reaches the middle and the line of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long needle between the thigh and the socket near the head at the parts remaining; extend the ends of the needle from the lower end of the part towards the upper end of the two parts, then twist around the socket and thigh as the excess of the bandage comes off.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place on the thigh at the site of that fracture sticks (pins), and place one stick over the bone of the socket from those.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the voids between the socket and thigh with thick cloths, so that the constriction may clot.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then start with a strong constriction in the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four layers, and as far away from the site of the fracture your constriction should be smaller and more gentle and wetter.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend both ends of the needle to the remaining parts until it reaches the chest cavity, strengthen both ends of the needles from the other side so that the muscle does not move away from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then leave the constriction on that side as it is so that nothing happens to the member to corrosion or cautery abscess nor inflammation and resemble those; if any of these causes occur, then examine him and adjust accordingly what happens close by, according to what we said about broken bones.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	And if in the bone is there a hole that you can put it, then cover as you make it equal according to what is possible for you; and otherwise, do something on him and let it heal from whatever came before it, until he heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases this thigh bone fracture is strengthened differently from the one that fits his sticks as we said in the assistant and arms.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of him done in this manner no limpness occurs in the patient; and if it is restored alone, then another one that is applied to his other socket, then it is necessary for that one to be limp for a while.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few months or a few more months, and all of this depends on the variety of conditions and other arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture at the knee joint.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that fractures at the knee joint are uncommon, yet they do occur in certain places.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	And if it happens to him with fracture, then it is merely a crack or strain in its parts, and this can be due to one or two blows, and the whole is felt accordingly.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of him is undertaken so that what was broken from his parts in those places where it should be added and joined according to the possibility for calculation, ease, and manufacture.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And place a plaster and press over that round pillar if you need from that; strengthen above with pressure according to what is appropriate for the compression.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other fractures, such as pus drainage and similarities to those where they should oppose to prevent any accident for what is convenient within so that he/she can be healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the knee joint.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the knee joint are two bones, one of which is thick and named after the knee itself; the other is delicate and called easy.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And when it comes to the types of fracture that occur in both bones of the arm, and thus restoration is done for him just like for the arm's, and his operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if there are injuries to both bones simultaneously, the knee joint changes into all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if it is just the delicate bone that gets injured, the knee joint changes towards the forward parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if it is the thick bone that gets injured, you make that space large, and they are of those causes that are not in your care.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And subsequently manage extension, calculation, and assembly of the braces according to that equality.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, when you consider that the fracture of the knee is long without a significant bend, make the extension stronger and softer, and stretch your strength upon it.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the knee, there is an operation for the arm on which you equalize the stars and complete your entire operation. Then you take pieces of stick of the foot that are placed under all the causes which are laid aside in solitude, made from palm branches; remove those to which there is a slight discomfort, and do not make it feel like the hands, and let its length be as long as the knee's length, and within the pus lay them.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And subsequently envelop each one in two layers according to the length of him/her, place one over the knee joint's part and the other on the opposite part, they should be within the pus at the appropriate location on the chest.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And subsequently tie the two stars in three locations of both extremities and at the middle one. With this structure, the knee is prevented from bending to either side of the right or left part, and it stands well-stationed.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already has been administered a stick of wood according to the length of the knee; and make sure the knee is placed upon him/her such that it retains its ability to move.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And above all, remember this when dealing with fractures, and especially when it comes to properly dressing the injury.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And subsequently, consider the knee every day and study it backward for further examination, take care of it to avoid pus, swelling or other similar causes; and when any cause from those occurs, then press on him/her so that within what is convenient, he/she can be healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the heel and the bones of the foot, fingers.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Fracture of the heel does not occur in entirety; rather, fractures happen to some extent in the foot bones; and in their fingers, only minor fractures occur, which do not happen to them except due to improper positions during months.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if there is a fracture in the foot bones and occasionally those bones are elevated over each other, then place your thigh on the ground prepared like this so that the knee remains extended.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And subsequently place one foot on that which is elevated from those bones, and press them down firmly and evenly into the locations until they turn around in their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And subsequently place a plaster and rest on it, and have the foot of the thigh placed with a small table under which there are two inflated cushions.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And subsequently strengthen that with the foot in a descending structure, for you have enveloped it with cloths and from other causes of which you need.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And as three or four days pass over him/her, then you release that ligament, which you will find the bones equalized, or if they are injured or displaced, and in those cases, it is thus what you know about operation.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if some fingers are injured, then restore those and equalize them as I have taught you in the restoration of fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And subsequently place the injured finger on a pillar according to the length of the finger, and make it slightly softer than usual. And then have your foot placed on this table which is recommended for you, and strengthen that with descending curvature.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is injured of the bones are two or three or more, then place on each finger a pillar equal to its amount wrapped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table at the bottom of the foot, and standing on one of the table's cushions hold your abdomen so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient to you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which we have mentioned to you in other fractures of accidents, and press on him/her so that what is convenient prevails.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the bone in the thigh, and of the shinbone, and of the leg bone in men.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone is broken, then it bends into the hollow place, and afterwards leans that towards the division of the two sides slightly, and is held behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife lifts the knee bone, and it is made like this in the bone of her thus as she wishes; and the woman is bent, and raises her two small ones gradually, for all this is outside until that is ahead of the division of the bone thus as she wishes and the broken thigh bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powders on her back, and when she wants to urinate, help her lift her knee so it becomes easier for her to urine, and after she urinates, return that according to the method by which you mixed that at the beginning, and then return to her original powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do it this way for seven days or about those, until that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take an ovine pouch and strengthen with the thread over her patient's back one catgut; and immerse the whole pouch into her thigh, and then blow into the tube with force while the pouch is inflated inside the thigh, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it is filled with the knee and stays for some days according to what we have recommended, until she gets well.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the shinbone of men or women is broken, then administer in its restoration and adjustment what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is straight is not hidden in these nearby fractures and few occur, mostly among those who have some study and use this my free advice; for that fracture means to you in the largest directions via of movement in the restoration and constriction of it, so understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	Take care of it in the leg of men when it is broken, take hold of it with your hand, and put the leg into that; then place over her wrappings made of fabric, and cover her, and let her rest for three days or about those, and she will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Regarding the restoration of fractures when they are infected.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for those who receive fractures when infected, and especially if the bone is large such as the bone of the knee or the femur, or similar to that, that you take care of it immediately with bloodletting if the conditions of bloodletting are suitable as we have said previously.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the infection discharges pus, then cover that you take care of it within so that you dust over her swollen place, if for other reasons there is no presence.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin restoring the fracture on that first day, and do not prolong this if it does not produce abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	Take care if an abscess occurs with cautery, then you let the restoration of her happen within the ninth day, until the abscess is drained, and do not approach her on the third and fourth in total, for this will cause other mishaps.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	Take care if the broken bone is prominent over the exposed wound, then cover that you force to reduce it and equalize it with your own hands in order to facilitate and make little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	Take care if extension is not at your preparation and the equilibration of her with your own hands, then you reduce that with your own hands using this instrument; and this tool is made of iron, its length is seven or eight dits and its width according to the quantity of the infection; and for this it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four according to the quantity you need in the treatment throughout all species of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it is redone, and with little roughness in order that it not be bent, you compress over it during the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it has a sharp tip at which her extremities are margined; and its texture of her is generally tensile, and in the middle of her towards the divisions.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of her:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is named in Greek "labre volenz atelarem", thus it is a spatula with little extension.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	And you should consider that her extremity be raised over the prominent end of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And force it into a groove until it returns the bone and is equalized with some equilibrium.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore force to equalize the ends of the fracture between them, and if her broken extremity is subtle and does not take that tool for good access, then you should insert her bone end into the place where the instrument has power over this.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	Take care if you cannot reduce the bone in this as we have recommended, then cut it with what is convenient for her of the scalpel which we said; or cut that with one of the saws in any method that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then cut only what remains on the surface of the rough and thin bones.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and then during this reduction the patient feels intense pain, you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and accordingly do this so that you apply great strength to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	Once your restoration to the bone is complete, then immerse a cloth in a stiff black vinegar, especially if it's summer, and do not place ointment or any other cause on the wound with oil, so as not to cause her sweating and running.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And nearby administer splints during the time of your completion of bone restoration, and leave the wound exposed to heal, inserting blades with a saw and using bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And observe all the caution to not contaminate the wound in the fracture area, as these are techniques that old doctors used, and allow accidents to happen to their patients' limbs or they corrode or seriously harm them, this is healing.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your narrowing is slight, soft, different from the narrowing of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear those bad accidents that we have listed, and you feel pain in that area, then do not press on that splint, but use that hard cloth wrap instead of splints and strengthen it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And about one or two days after the wound begins to heal, so it is on their part that a brace should be made from the cloth you placed over that area. Then administer ointments, which are the ones we usually use for healing wounds, like tetrarhomachion and similar remedies, in that way.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And make sure you loosen the bandage and consider the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and sealed, and ensure that each limb is prepared in such a way that the healing process flows from them to their parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound takes days and is not consolidated nor removed by your brace, then you should know that here are the small ones for which you can remove the brace when necessary to heal the wound in peace.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those small ones, separate and remove those that are not attached, those that remain attached force you to remove them according to what is possible for your own sake.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if something happens to the wound that it festers or decays, so it is inflammation or another form of corruption and putrefaction, then you must press on each one of those as your own guide for how to treat it, which has a preceding narrative in its chapter about healing.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And in the case where you want to make it so that your best is in you and you present yourself: when bone is broken, press over the limb like the bone of the thigh and the helper, similar to those of large limbs, and do not assume that it will heal or removal by this leads to death; leave it there until it can settle, which will fall naturally after about 20 days or .30.; And then treat the wound if you see fit, and if not, leave it as it is.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Regarding the treatment of necrosis that occurs in the aftermath of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Decrepit wounds cause this necrosis in the aftermath of fracture healing, especially close to joints, and the figure of the limb is rubbed away by it; so forcibly you prohibit the limb from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the necrosis is recent and administer medicines that have a止血 effect such as aloes, ashes, look at it, compress it with cabbage leaves, or use them; choose some or all of these, and apply them to the necrosis on a poultice, and hold them in place properly to avoid leakage.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the bandage without removing that for a few days; then remove it and apply another one until the necrosis has improved. Or strengthen with a layer of lead sheeting, since lead has the property of reducing everything that inflates in limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the necrosis has already turned and spread out, and it needs to be brought about gradually, then divide it by the uppermost part of its partition line, and cut off the excess or remove that with some remedies until it has improved; treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Regarding the restoration of fractures when they are restored and inappropriately moving the delicate member according to its natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and it is attempted to move the delicate member according to its natural state, this should not be done except for certain causes: among which one is an excess of serous fluid in the joint and movement made without considering that; or due to excessive swelling from the joint's ligaments where nourishment can't reach the limb; or due to excess of ointment; or due to unnecessary movement before its time; or due to weakness of blood circulation in the patient's body and debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment of this is to reduce the patient, making their blood flow and circulate in them; apply baths; and apply heat and joy on them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice draws in its nourishing fluids or continues to apply liniment with hot water until the nutrition flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Regarding the treatment of broken bones that are incorrectly set, and avoiding the operation for what you consider.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When there is a member already restored to the healing of its deformity and necrosis in the broken bone, and it takes on this unnatural shape, however, the limb does not prohibit itself from its natural operation, so you should not accept the word of someone who thinks that this limb is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if you need to return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands. The first sentence translates as: May these medical surgeons and restorers who have done this in our land be criticized; and this operation is very condemned causing great fear of the sign which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If limping and swelling are recent issues, then seek them in a bath of hot water in which medicinal herbs are soaked, such as mint leaves and herbs with cooling properties; and apply to him the application of 'mollifying ointment' just as it is done for well-prepared baths. Or take a paste made from aloe gel and apply it to him; or that he be treated with the juice of mint of the high and be rubbed with linseed oil or almond oil, then wrap him in that; or if he has taken fatty fruits and they are strained through wool sponges, and similar ones to those of the medicines called consolidators.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by gentle, continuous rubbing that is applied to the wetter parts, and it should be administered movements of the limb in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the twist has already gone ahead and been made strong, turning into flesh, necessitating its healing with iron, then seek that pus be above the incision and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and the cutting should be done where it is superfluous for removing nodular parts of that metal on the bone with fine knives. It should also be administered in that area with enthusiasm and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Regarding conversation about dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of one of his joints in place, so that it cannot move, and it causes the shape of the limb to be distorted, causing great pain and serious injuries on the body.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when it happens to one of the dislocations, immediately puncture so that it can be reduced, and do not delay in reducing that, for if it is delayed, the place gets stuck and strengthens under that, making the reduction of dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this, do not make it too tight or stretch during the time of immobilization, as tightened areas cause convulsions and biting pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, take care to immobilize the foot of the patient, and then leave it in place so that the swelling can rest; and have the limb wrapped in warm water and oil, and have the reduction done with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all limbs should be treated with what comes to mind, which will recall its memory in its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already organized the chapters on dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the body above comes into play with the part below.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the jaw joint.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So if the two jaws are dislocated but not broken; and the dislocation of both is done according to two methods: either they are gently moved back into their places with a slight movement and are softened slightly; or they are completely dislocated and fully within, where saliva from the body is produced and cannot be contained by that, nor can it close its mouth, and the patient's tongue is enveloped in their words.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of something is slight, then it returns to its major positions by itself due to minor causes.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and full, then it should be administered a gentle reduction of it, and it should not be delayed completely.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And when the minister has the head of the body, and the doctor inserts his finger at the place of one side's mouth in the bone of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both of his fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other commands come from the rest as they are outside under those that equalize; and command the body to stop its jaws and move them out of every part. And the doctor equalizes the jaw and inspects the jaw so it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially so when both jaws are simultaneously dislocated, then administer evacuation with warm water and oil, during which a slight reduction of both is done and do not delay the complete reduction of both as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and are equalized, and the mouth of the body is closed and not softened, then place on those powder of drap with cerat, and make it using wax and oil rubbed; and have them bound with soft wraps.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the body of the patient sleep on his two sides, his head between two pillows, so that it does not get stuck to the right or left side; and do not force him to eat any cause with difficulty; having his food be forbidden by lion, until when pains are softened and jaws are nozzed, then let him eat whatever he wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with ease, and do not exert effort on the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, or breathing, until the jaw is nozzed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws when they are dislocated in any hour and do not convert to their own places is difficult, then convulsions and regular fevers occur, and it strengthens you that the belly of the body is swollen, and it strengthens you with vomiting colera pure.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you do this, then know that it is a loss; and boils will develop in the person to whom this happens within three days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On reducing the dislocation of the fulcrum and the tip of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The fulcrum is not dislocated within the socket due to its continuation with the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated at the part outside, which is described by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of him/her is that the patient lies on his/her back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And apply pressure with your palm on the area with strong pressure, so it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place something over that, apply plaster and dust there, and strengthen that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the end of that which is continuous with it not be dislocated in any day; then conduct that it may be reduced and made equal according to what we have said and according to your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And place something over that, apply plaster and dust, and bandage, and instruct the patient to maintain restfulness and recovery during their healing.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this treatment, reduce the tip of the muscle when it is separated from its location.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On reducing the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is only dislocated in three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated at the root of the tendon on the side of the body.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, which is done with heat; and it is not dislocated on the back part by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated on the front part by nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is mostly dislocated and lies outside at the parts below of the tendon, especially in those with few muscles, slightly dislocated; but in those with many muscles, it lies outside with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And a strong blow or impact often happens to some people, and the muscle of him/her swells with an abscess, and it becomes dislocated due to this already being dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	So conduct that you treat him/her while you are over-equipped with him/her, and then proceed in his/her treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And when you know the dislocation of him/her when it is at the parts below of the tendon; and so distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, which you find among those with obvious diversity; and find in the tip of the muscle a concavity and on the edge of the cap of the muscle as big as a hen's egg, and the patient cannot return their hand to their armpit, nor even that one for all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	And if it is dislocated below the foot or near it, then you will find a clear touch there and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And for this dislocation, slight reduction is performed when the patient is young and it's fresh.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of him/her is that the attendant raises his/her hand to above; and then places your fingers on the edge of the tendon below, and elevates the joint with strength to its place; and the attendant raises his/her hand, extends it there; and then pauses it so that it returns slightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	And if for what we have said it does not return, and is due to the manner of dislocation, several days later, then conduct that the patient be bathed in hot water and administered a salve that soothes and lines as if they were oat flour, fenugreek, and thyme in water, and should be given.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And have the patient lie on their back and place your fingers on the edge of their tendon waiting for a wool covering that is equal in softness to stiffness, and then the doctor places his/her arm under the spot and raises the tip of the muscle vertically, pulling the patient's hand so it does not get stuck at the parts below, and another attendant holds the tip of the patient's hand so it doesn't get stuck at the parts below, which will return immediately to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it according to this manner: and you make present a man who is longer than the patient, from that side of his/her body, and inserts his/her muscle below the tendon of the patient's hand and raises the tendon above him/her so that the patient hangs in the air, and another attendant pulls the patient's hand away from the parts below of their abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	And if the patient is slight, then conduct that something else causing suspension be present, because in this case it makes the dislocation return immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced steadily according to another manner: and you place in the ground a long pole whose head is round in shape, like a mortar's pestle, which should not be thick or thin, and then have the patient stand above this pole; because when laid on top of the pole with lions' skin, the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and then extend their hand to the parts below of the other side; and stretch your body from the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce him/her due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this cure: and you take a pole whose length equals two arms, its width should be four digits, and its thickness should be as thick as the edge of the tendon according to this shape:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And around the head place lion's hide so that the fire does not harm the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And place another cushion under the patient's buttocks, and spread your hand or arm over the fire inside the parts where you are, and let the fire rest on the support and the arms and the tip of your hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And place one arm on a ladder scale according to its width, and the hand spread out in the places where you are, and the other leg is suspended from the other side, so that the joint can come back immediately.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the treatment of the patient is completed in any way that is possible to you, then prepare as follows: place a wool cushion under his buttocks equal in quantity; and spread on it prepared plaster mixed with moli powder and egg white over the entire muscle area, even after being rubbed onto it, and strengthen the wool cushion with tight bandages; and turn the plaster around the cushion, and let your hand be attached to his neck, and leave it like this, without harming your hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And when the food is given to the patient little by little, inside which member it becomes more comfortable, which makes his recovery easier.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And the food should be given more generously every seven or five days and exercise is performed; and if it's closed and not softened, then already it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to dampness that affects it or for other reasons, then you should apply a cautery with three pokes as described in the section on the use of cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this has been done and after seven days the ligament and the joint are released but not closed, and the plaster and the bandage are reduced on some occasions, but not closed and cannot raise that arm above the parts, then you should know that the nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or extended or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is done to the foot or the heel or the parts behind, the reduction is performed with pressure and extension on the elbows, so it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another bandage is applied there, and care that one until healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is severe healing in the member and delayed movement of him, then the patient uses hot baths internally until that heaviness is relieved and returns to his original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capítulo XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the elbow.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the elbow joint is dislocated due to difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; it's dislocated in all directions, but mostly towards the front and back. The dislocation of it is not revealed by you when you press or touch those places according to which figure it is dislocated. When you adjust the dislocated elbow, this is clearly declared to you, as the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that its muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And when you touch them, reduce the dislocation as soon as it reaches his boil point; if it reaches his boil point, it's difficult to reduce him, and he is not fully healed. Especially when it's towards the back part, which is worse than all other types of dislocation, and has more pain, and hot baths lead to death for that one.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of him, when it is that which can be reduced, is that his hand should be extended between two assistants, and his arm expanded, and the doctor's hands are on his elbow and him, and you push the joint with the heels of his assistant's feet or inside the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in front of the parts, then returns this way that bends the hand to his own hand, while hitting the elbow inside the palm's edge.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not submit to reduction, then administer strong extension and powerful force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And this is that two assistants extend the arm, and have those aids in such a way that they are not overwhelmed by the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate his arm around all parts; because it is wrapped in a folded long cloth over his hand or ligament.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, apply some oil to that so as those causes which help in lubrication of the joint are facilitated; and then force the joint with strong pressure until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And when the reduction is done, you should place him on that plaster in which stiffness and movement are facilitated by egg white, and extended with tight bandage; his arm should be suspended from the neck, and left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then should be released; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you release his ligament and leave him.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strengthened, then you repeat the plaster and ligament, and leave him for some days until they are hardened; and then release it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If there is severe healing near the joint reduction and his position is in movement, then you should apply moisturization in bath and subtle friction, as well as compression, until it's relieved; or place him on top of the joint for a while, which is the fatty part of his thigh; then bind him and leave him over bone throughout the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And take that one out, and put it in the bath; and when it becomes soft, then you rub the joint with a warm friction, and repeatedly apply this medicine on that spot, which is its natural remedy, once or twice, and the third time, and so on.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already spread within the liver's substance, within its limits.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, place over that wet and scraped opening on the flesh; and do this for several times, until that part is moistened and returns to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	For the treatment of subluxation of the elbow, it's about the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	In some cases, the hand is partially dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy. Contrary to other joints, however, it's more important that there be speed in the reduction when it happens, before the site gets swollen or a boil occurs.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of this dislocation is that you place the elbow joint of the patient on a table and extend their hand, and the doctor places their hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint, pushing that spot back to its original position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it's important to consider whether the palm is already inside the elbow of the patient; then the patient should place both hands on a table for extension and reduction. If dislocation occurred before, then it should be the position of the hand inherently on the table, so that the doctor's hand comes over this vicinity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so if it returns promptly, that's good; and otherwise, then strengthen that with padding to drain the boil and let that be. And don't repeatedly do this, because otherwise, you won't endure or manage the reduction of that anymore as time passes.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint bends according to its flexibility; and don't blame the patient for any cause, but when their hand is softened and can't be blamed for any cause; then you should understand that the nerves are severed or torn, and so it's not a disease in that case but it needs to be treated with a cautery around that area and strengthen that treatment until you get some results.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And when swelling returns, then place over that dressing which we have prescribed, and let it rest and be strengthened for several days; and then gently remove it and let it rest, also exercising the hand of the patient.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However, if the motion of that is still hindered and causes any gravity, then ease that with warm water and friction several times, until it's relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	For the treatment of dislocation of fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Several times, you dislocate the fingers in every direction.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of those fingers is dislocated towards the back or inside of it, then hold the finger and push the dislocation away with your thumbs, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the tip of the finger, and suspend that from the part where it is dislocated, letting that rest for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend that and extend that until its straightness matches in that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it's night, lay that according to that narrative, and don't cease to dislocate that during the day and exercise with motion, and lay that at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And pretend this if it's dislocated in the palm of the hand, and lay that towards that side, and do this with your first operation until it heals.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do this when it's dislocated in other directions.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder blades (scapulae) of both sides.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it happens to any of the shoulder blades or collarbone causing full dislocation, and there is a large swelling around those places, then in that case there is no treatment, for death will threaten the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The sign of this is that the excretion from the patient goes beyond their will and cannot be contained; and several times you soften some limbs of them or both breasts of them, or one of those; or it swells one shoulder blade in its place, for if there are swellings they should be treated by softening them until they can be moved to four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	And that has swollen behind and is called gelsemia (a condition characterized by swelling).
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment of this is that then you must consider if the gelsemia occurs during childhood, in which case there is no cure for it and neither can all be healed.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In those that occur through blow or impact or similar to those, the Ancient ones would say that long treatments were prescribed, of which the most important returns to common sense; I have already made a shortened version from that, for which some excuse is given because of the abundance in it, based on my familiarity with its middle exposition, to which I refer and expand upon using various tools from that in which I show this and elaborate upon it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And they say that for gelsemia occurring in front of the feet, it is neither a disease nor can it be healed; similarly for that which occurs on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And only that which occurs directly at the point I have prescribed is cured of those, not the others.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And the patient should be laid out on their face above a pillow somewhat near the wall, and should be spread out so that their feet are moistened by themselves to prevent their legs from getting dirty.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And one straight board should be placed, fixed in the ground near the pillow around the head of the patient, and another board in front of the feet of the patient at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister should hold the board, and not fix it in a hole; and another minister should hold the other according to that manner.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And cover the head of the patient with it and fasten the tie around their forehead firmly; extend the end of the band to the board which should be under the head, attach that there; and fasten the other band on their buttocks with their legs, aiming for their chest; and adjust all the bands and attach those to the second board which should be under their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister should extend the band to the part of the board opposite the foot, and let the two boards and the bands of their places not tighten too much under them, but rather do not make it as tight as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor should place his hands firmly in the middle where he can return it, or place one on a table, and have them adjust their feet under that as they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return in this way, then take a table whose height or length is about three spans, and dig into the wall as we said that there is a place for the patient under the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the table's edge on the spine, the doctor places his feet at the other end, and stretches himself so that the spine is curved and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open each side which is twisted on the back; and it's what you should place in the ground, under the head of the patient at the end of the pillow two boards, their length being about one span, and place the head of them at the end of the pillow respectively two boards; and make the distance between each board a span, and that has been made in every board to draw around it, and each should be fixed on the ground so as not to loosen.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And make another board in which is the backbone, and it twists at the two ends of both boards.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a notch where the board forms, its length being about one span in this which twists; and in the other two boards it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And adjust the bands that you have tightened on the feet of the patient in the groove which should be under their head, and the bands that you have tightened on their thighs in the groove which should be under their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And you must adjust each groove with one minister who twists the groove with his hand, and the doctor equalizes the spine as we said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the groove:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine has returned and the location has been equalized, then take a powdered plaster of calf's lung and stop it; and place over the powdered plaster a table whose width is about three thumbs or roughly those, and the length should be as much as takes up the spot of fatness, and over the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And adjust with the band that we said, and let the patient receive subtle nourishment so that it may heal.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there remains any danger at the end of healing in that place, then it is prescribed to take medicines that soften and cleanse before and for long periods after applying the table, which we have recommended; and already a lead leaf has been administered in that place.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes injuries occur at the end of the spines of both sides, and are caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which has already injured so that no one should be expected to take this medicine, which will cause you to die suddenly.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Regarding the treatment of a hernia that has been dislocated.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the junction of the iliac bone and the junction of the muscle do not simply undergo dislocation, but accidents happen to those ones which happen to other joints with little movement and curvature.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the junction of the ilium is dislocated in four ways, it is dislocated towards the inside parts, or towards the outside parts, or towards the front parts, or towards the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is mostly dislocated towards the inside parts, and rarely towards the front or back parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation towards the inside parts is that when you adjust the healthy buttock against the patient, it is longer, and the tendon is more prominent than in a healthy person; the patient cannot bend their leg up to their knee, which causes them to bend their leg at its knee joint, so that the buttocks have already reached this point.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of him where accidents happen are dislocated is towards the outside parts, it's that his accidents are contrary to this one.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of him where accidents happen are dislocated in front parts is that expand his healthy side according to complementation, but not bend that pain which is in the tendon, and if it is pushed towards the front he cannot proceed on it; and his urine is retained and his bending gets stuck, you should move him above the shin.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And a sign for the one to whom you occur dislocation in parts behind is that he does not spread his knees apart, nor can he bend forward as long as he bends backwards, and the change of him is quicker than the other, and the backward bending softens, and the end of the thigh lies towards that part.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of the types of this dislocation is what you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that already has the person close to you undergoing treatment for it and you perform its reduction according to their disposition, not in all; therefore do not proceed with assuming a diagnosis in such cases.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case where the dislocation is recent, and it belongs to one of the four types of dislocation, then you should guide in such a way that you return the joint and extend it inwardly and outwardly, and move it left and right, which strength returns him and does not require another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this manner, then assume that you must prepare force and extend the change of him from his side or over his chest, or on the side where the dislocation is located; and another minister extends his hand above him so that he places his chest near the patient's ribs. And strengthen at will on the length of the thigh, and have another minister press gently on the end of the tendon.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And whether it is extension of him or from inside to backward bending on the sternum's side, or from behind to the backside's side.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And when it is the extension of all in one go, that under which the patient's buttocks are raised to the ground level and which hangs down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it's good; and otherwise, for each species that is necessary in its own treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of his own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is towards the inside parts, assume that the buttocks are reclined onto his side; then place the tendons over the length of the thigh in that area where between the end of the thigh and the location of backward bending there's a protrusion; then extend the tendon from the part towards the backward bending to its opposite sternum part.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister with strength takes his arms, and tightens the large area of the thigh on the backside, then extends it outwardly by extension forcefully, which returns in its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species requires less treatment for the member to be reduced than the other ones.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	And if you excuse yourself and do not adhere to this treatment of all, then assume that the two buttocks of the backside be in tandem under strong forceful tendons, lightly, on both thighs and both knees.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each is as much as four fingers, and the backside's change extends more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And let the backside be suspended over the head of the trunk, and in this way; and let the length of him of the earth be as much as two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong youth to contract the end of the thigh, and be suspended by another backside youth, and let another youthful contract the thing with forcibly pushed forcefulness, which makes the joint return to its place at speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the self-reduction, when dislocation is towards the outside part, assume that the backside jags according to what we advised during the patient's examination; and strengthen the tendon over the backside change properly, and on his feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And let two trunks be placed, one on the foot of him, and the other on his head; then have two adjusted trunks be located halfway down the backside where he is wetted with dampness, so that the backside does not get dampened by the trunk being between his thighs, because you should maintain extension in these inward parts without it being pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister extends according to their part, and the doctor with his hand administers reduction according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So if you adhere to the contrary, it's very good; and otherwise, pause on that diligently and thus follow what we said during examination for that equality.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	And let the backside jags gently onto his sides there.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is towards the front parts, then let the change be extended slightly, and according to this middle story on the backside; and the doctor pauses his right palm onto the forward backside, and has that contracted with another hand, and in that contraction he pauses him who extends towards the inward parts from the location of backward bending.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is towards the back parts, then do not let the backside be extended to his inward parts, and it's raised onto the ground; have that paused on a hard cause, as that is when an elongation is seen if his width is dislocated towards his outward parts, according to what we said about him lying between two widths; and it's on his face and his tendons are extended, as we said, without much deviation.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And have that compression administered onto the table at the location where the joint is bent.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So when the reduction process is completed according to how it should be - and the sign of the reduction being successful isn't hidden from you, meaning you extend both legs, and when you bend those equally and the patient stretches their leg and expands their excusal area, then you know that the member as per the process has returned. Then you adjust both thighs and place padding under them, and stretch it so that no part of it gets distorted; and adhere the patient to rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then loosen the thread and padding, and compare one leg against the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you find those bends equal in both places, then you know that the dislocation has already been fixed, and from there let the patient rest.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster that area, then stretch it according to your first stretching, and let that rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then loosen that area, and have the patient walk around with it for several days until they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outward from the parts, inward towards the center, and outward to the parts at the front of the body compared to those at the back; it is not dislocated forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of a dislocation in the patient is that you command them to press their leg against the thigh; then you know that the shoulder has been dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these methods is that you place your leg straight under them, so that their shoulder can already extend if possible; attach yourself to them facing their body, and place their foot between your feet; then have them bend their arm against you, hold those together firmly on their shoulder, and another holds their hand above the dislocated shoulder with force, while another extends their other hand until the shoulder returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of restoration in them is that their shoulder adheres against the thigh under light labor.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then plaster that area and have the shoulder adhere against the thigh, and place them under one limb for three or four days, and loosen those afterwards.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not make the patient walk for several days, until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	More so if your reduction of them is justified, then administer strong extension to the ligaments as described in the previous narrative on hip healing.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle can be sometimes slightly dislocated due to minor injuries, and in other instances it can be completely dislocated. The dislocation occurs either inward from the parts or outward towards them.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of an ankle dislocation is that you see it swollen proceeding to the part where it has been dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	More so for treating a minor dislocation is gentle restoration, which involves extending them with ease and equality until it returns to its position.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	More so in treating when the ankle is completely dislocated, you should place your leg straight under them, and have another strong and brave assistant hold their foot at the back of their leg in the middle area.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then have your right hand under the top of their foot, and with your left hand at the lower part of their foot in the area of the ankle bone.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull their foot towards you with your right hand, and with the left one from two sides, and extend it with the left. And press the ankle bones on the right against the shin bone.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And perform these two actions as we have discussed.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then press the ankle bones against the shin bone from the third side, and you are at the ankle joint.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two stages as with this method, and if you find the foot even, it's good; otherwise, then on them perform surgery again, which is when it returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	More so if it is forbidden for you to reduce them as we have recommended, then place your leg under their thigh on the ground, and stretch a mat on hard earth, and enclose them between their thighs, and you already cover them with a sheet so that they don't fall down.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the assistant should hold their thighs together, and another assistant extends their foot against the extension of their leg or on the ligament that lies under the neck of the ankle; and extend each person against their partner's extension, and the mat remains between the thighs of the person lying down, so that their body doesn't pull towards the sides opposite to their extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor bends the ankle at their joints, and another assistant holds the healthy thigh on the opposite sides, where the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and you have been informed of the success of your reduction, then stop using bandage and stretch it strongly against the ligaments, and connect their foot to the shin bone.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And when you fear or protect from the nerves that are behind on the ankle, in order that the ligaments over them do not become forceful and harm them heavily.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And after that, let him rest for two or three days; and if the inflammation subsides, stretch him out.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And on the third day or fourth, untie him, and forbid the patient to walk for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	May it be that if he feels compelled to go in front of that space, not ensure that the dislocation is not over something dissolved and corrupted, and thus so that it does not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you happen to come across an abscess on him, then cover where you administer in the area of him where we previously detailed our narrative, in another location for treatment and application, within which it will be rejuvenated.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter xxxiv.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Make sure that the one which is dislocated is adjusted to about several extensions of a session; and what is not difficult, before it becomes easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	May it be that if the dislocation is in some toes of one foot, then make him lie his foot on a level spot or table, and he should stand as if walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then stand on your foot, place your hand over the area that you aim towards the joints, and press it onto the point of the toes with force until it returns, and observe it to be adjusted, not appearing in the expected location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place the belly of his foot on a table that holds all the foot, which has two ends, and press it with strength until it becomes decent and firm for three days; and then untie him and have him rest from walking for a few days, during which it will be strengthened and its effectiveness assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocation that may occur from illness or from fracture or at any time.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of those happens, and you attend to the treatment of that and the restoration of him, many things occur leading to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And so do not assume over the treatment of him, but rather he who is wise in the art, long accustomed, merciful and compassionate, slow, not reckless or presumptuous; and use at the beginning of medicines that lead to abscesses alone, leave the patient to divine judgment, but instead go to the one you hope for salvation from loss, for alleviation of the illness, in which you show some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then make every effort to do him the reduction immediately during the beginning of the cause, before an abscess appears.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the limb returns as we wish, then administer a regimen that leads to an abscess cautery and heals the illness with what suits him from the dried ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is from a fracture and happens in the separated joints, then you perform their setting, do what we have said about those illnesses related to what was previously detailed in the locations of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And follow and avoid according to your skill that of the instruments in the paths of fear as it is followed by my preaching; for this is better to you from what you owe to your Creator, more permanent to your glory, and more healthful to you when you see these things at your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albuqayj perfectly from which God shall be glorified.
Amen.	Amen.
